URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pId=19239&catId=102887

Found target section:    Cats
Diseases and Conditions
Allergies & Immune System
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats
We get hay fever; dogs get itchy skin. This condition is usually seasonal - but not always - and many treatments are available. Find out the causes and what you can do to relieve your pet's discomfort.
Asthma in Cats
If your cat needs to open its mouth to breathe or if its abdomen moves excessively as it breathes (and it is not purring), then it may be suffering from feline asthma. Asthma is a recurring respiratory compromise that occurs when the lung airways constrict either spontaneously or in response to stimuli that normally should not cause a reaction.
Atopic Dermatitis in Cats
You or someone you know may have allergies, but did you know your cat can too?
Many conditions besides allergies can cause your cat to be
itchy.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats
Dust mites feed off of skin scales and dander shed by humans and animals. Mites love bedding, carpeting, and anywhere they can find a hiding place with the likelihood of skin dander being present. Dust mites also require a relatively high humidity in the home to truly thrive.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT)
Platelets can be mistaken by the immune system as invaders. When this happens, antibodies coat the platelets and the spleen's phagocytes remove them in numbers up to 10 times greater than the normal platelet removal rate.
Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses
Most people know someone who gets periodic "allergy shots" for airborne allergies. What this means is that an individually-made serum is created using small amounts of allergens (proteins against which the person reacts). It works for dogs and cats, too.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats
There has never been a class of drug that has more application in disease treatment than the glucocorticoid class. Indeed, this group is rivaled only by antibiotics in lives saved. But side effects from the glucocorticoid group are numerous and can be classified into those seen with short-term use and those seen in long-term use.
Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats
Immunization represents stimulation of the immune system, an inherently inflammatory process. Vaccination reactions severe enough to produce shock are
extremely
rare and are a function of an individual pet's immune response.
Blood-related
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) in Dogs and Cats
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an extreme complication of numerous already life-threatening conditions leading to the deregulation of the body's natural mechanisms of blood clotting and blood clot dissolving.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Cats
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, or NI, is a rare immune-mediated disease that is caused when newborn kittens with type A blood drink colostrum from a mother with type B blood.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats
There are three important ways in which the kidney patient loses red blood cells. The first way is bone marrow suppression. The second way is bleeding. The third way is called hemodilution. Maintaining a stable red blood cell quantity keeps the patient energetic and spirited and is crucial to staying alive.
Thrombocytopenia in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a condition called thrombocytopenia, his platelet count is low. When the platelet count is low, it is harder for clotting to occur.
Cancers, Lumps & Bumps
Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals
But it still seems to shock people to learn that dogs, cats, rabbits, rats and a host of other domestic species can get breast cancer, too. Since the aim of Breast Cancer Awareness Month is to raise awareness, our aim here is to wave the flag for those who can’t speak for themselves and raise awareness of mammary cancer in companion animals. We also want people to know that breast cancer and mammary gland cancer are the same disease; it’s just called by a different name in other species.
Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent
Cancer cells go mad systematically. The cellular delinquents bust past the body's natural immune system, as though a gate was left open, burgeoning into abnormal cells.
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs
These drugs are typically used to treat lymphoma.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiosarcoma has three classic locations: skin and subcutaneous forms, splenic forms, and heart-based forms. With the exception of the skin form, which can often be eliminated by surgery, a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma is bad news.
Injection Site Sarcoma (Cancer) in Cats
Fibrosarcomas have been recognized for a very long time as difficult, deeply rooted tumors of cats. What has only recently been recognized is the potential for vaccination to lead to the formation of these tumors.
Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats
Unfortunately, most insulinomas in dogs and cats are malignant. This is bad news but the good news is that regardless of this fact, surgery is still helpful as the bulk of the tumor (if not all of it) can be removed.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Some lung tumors are benign, and some are not
Lymphoma
This form of cancer, also called lymphosarcoma, is the most common malignancy of dogs, cats, and humans. A plentitude of information is available, information that is necessary in order to make intelligent decisions about an affected pet.
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma accounts for one third of all cancers developed by cats. When the mediastinal lymph nodes become infiltrated with lymphoma, a mass is apparent in the mediastinum and a cancerous fluid fills the chest, restricting breathing. The fluid can be tapped but it will be back without treatment.
Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs
There are three types of skin lymphoma: mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Mammary Tumors in Cats
In cats with mammary tumors, approximately 90% are malignant with rapid spread to adjacent glands and the nearest set of lymph nodes.
Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Most mast cell tumors arise in the skin but technically they can arise anywhere that mast cells are found. Mast cell tumors are notoriously invasive and difficult to treat.
Meningioma in Dogs and Cats
Meningioma is the most common brain tumor of cats and dogs. Meningiomas are generally benign. In dogs, seizures are the most common sign. In cats, signs are more vague and consist of listlessness and behavior changes.
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The oral squamous cell carcinoma does not spread as you normally think of a cancer spreading, but it is so locally invasive that it carries a poor prognosis. The only hope of good survival comes from early detection. Learn what to look for and what important risk factors are.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The squamous cell carcinoma is not only the most common oral malignancy in cats, it has one of the poorest outcomes.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
When squamous cell carcinoma occurs in the mouth and throat, it's called oral squamous cell carcinoma. In these oral cases, the lesion is usually located on the gums or tonsils.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
The transitional cell carcinoma is a particularly unpleasant tumor of the urinary bladder that usually grows in the lower neck of the bladder, causing a partial or complete obstruction to urination. Bloody urine and straining to urinate are typically the signs noted by the owner.
Cardiac & Circulatory System: Heart & Blood Vessels
Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats
Atrial fibrillation (sometimes called "A fib") is an arrhythmia, an irregularity of the heart's rhythm.
Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Cardiomyopathy means heart muscle disease.
Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats
In congestive heart failure, fluid is retained in specific parts of the body, depending on the side of the heart that is diseased.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most common acquired heart diseases in dogs.  DCM is a disease of the heart muscle.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats
A heart murmur is one of several types of abnormal sounds your veterinarian can hear when listening to your pet's heart with a stethoscope. The murmur itself is not treated; the underlying cause of the murmur may or may not be treated.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets
High blood pressure is an extremely important concern in human medicine. High stress lifestyle, smoking, and high salt diet all contribute to this potentially dangerous condition and virtually everyone in the U.S. knows how serious it can be. But what about our pets? They don't smoke or worry about the mortgage and they don't deposit cholesterol in their blood vessels. They do, however, get high blood pressure, especially in age and here is what you probably should know.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common acquired heart diseases in cats but is rare in dogs.
Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats
Just like people, some pets need a pacemaker to keep their hearts ticking.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats
Sometimes the ductus arteriosus fails to close in a newborn. It remains open, or patent, usually because the muscles in the ductus failed to form properly.
Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats
The hepatic portal system consists of numerous veins, but sometimes these systems can go awry. The portal vein is the big one into the liver, where the smaller veins converge before entering the liver.
Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is high blood pressure in the arteries leading in and out of your pet's lungs. If the high blood pressure becomes too severe, it can cause disease and failure of the right side of the heart.
Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease
For pets with congestive heart failure, it is important to check the response to medication by measuring the respiratory rate at home.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram
An echocardiogram is
a type of ultrasound that looks closely at the heart as well as inside and around it
Dental & Oral
Bad Breath in Dogs and Cats
Halitosis, also called bad breath, is as an offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity. Bad breath is a common presenting pet odor complaint. Causes may be commonly be related to the mouth or rarely related to other health problems.
Cat's Teeth Examination for Cat Owners
It is easy to recognize if your cat has a broken leg, but how about a broken tooth? You would think pets would stop eating when they had oral problems. Unfortunately, this is not usually the case. By the time most owners recognize oral disease in their pets, the problem is chronic and progressive.
Cleft Palate or Lip in Puppies and Kittens
With either type, it's difficult for the affected puppy or kitten to eat properly
Clinical Signs of Oral or Dental Disease in Pets
If you see any of these clinical signs, take your pet to your veterinarian for a complete oral examination.
Dental Care and What to Expect
Root canals, dental x-rays, orthodontics, crowns, caps, implants, and periodontal surgery for pets? You must be kidding? Not at all. Dental procedures are routinely performed in veterinary practices daily. How does a loving pet owner know if dental care is needed and where can a pet owner go for advanced dental care.
Dental Care in Cats
Feline dental pathology and care are perhaps the most overlooked and under-treated areas in small animal medicine.
Gingivostomatitis in Cats
FGS is a severe oral disease that affects some cats where the body becomes allergic to plaque around the teeth.
Oral Masses/Ulcers in Dogs and Cats
Some dogs and cats develop growths in their mouths. Similar to humans, these growths may be benign or malignant. Once a mass is noticed, analysis must be made to determine the cause of the growth.
Orthodontics for Pets
Just as you would want to cure a painful skin condition or sore joint in your pet, you should also consider relieving pain in your pet's mouth. When an oral problem is caused by poorly aligned teeth, orthodontic treatment may be needed.
Periodontal Disease in Dogs and Cats
Periodontal disease is inflammation of some or all of a tooth's support. When compared to gingivitis, periodontitis indicates bone loss. If left untreated, periodontitis may cause loose painful teeth as well as internal disease. Periodontal disease is caused by plaque (bacteria).
Periodontal Disease in Pets
More than 85% of dogs and cats older than 4 years have periodontal pathology.
Plasma Cell Stomatitis in Cats
Expect an affected cat to require teeth cleaning under general anesthesia at least every 6 months. If medical management fails, all teeth need to be removed.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Retained Baby Teeth in Dogs and Cats Need Surgical Extraction
When deciduous (baby) teeth don't fall out to make way for the permanent teeth, they are called retained deciduous teeth. Retained deciduous teeth should be extracted surgically soon after they are discovered because they will cause dental problems (overcrowding in the mouth, plaque buildup, malocclusion, etc.).
Salivary Mucocele in Dogs and Cats
The most common place for a salivary mucocele is on or beneath the lower jaw or under the tongue
Stomatitis in Cats
Cats can be affected by inflammation of the entire mouth called stomatitis or lymphocytic plasmacytic syndrome (LPS).
Tooth Resorption in Cats
A common feline oral malady is the feline oral resorptive lesion (FORL).
Toothbrushing and Dental Prophylaxis in Cats and Dogs
Why should I brush my dog's or cat's teeth?
Dermatology: Skin & Nails
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Breed-Related Dermatoses in Dogs and Cats
Cat and dog breed-related skin diseases are listed.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Cuterebriasis is a Parasite Causing Skin Infections in Dogs and Cats
Treatment (removal of the larva) is one of the simplest things in veterinary medicine; your veterinarian will probe and enlarge the breathing hole, grasp the parasite with forceps, and just pull the invader out.
Demodectic Mange in Cats
Demodectic mange in dogs is extremely common, especially in puppies. Demodicosis in cats is much more unusual.
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex in Cats
Feline allergic skin disease can take some highly ulcerative forms, especially involving the upper lip. Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex is a hard condition to explain, especially since it has several forms, but we will give it a try.
Feline Acne
While the initial acne and infection can be healed, additional outbreaks may occur.
Flea and Tick Control Products for Dogs and Cats
The comparison charts - one for dogs, one for cats - allows side-by-side glimpse of available products so you can determine what is best for your pets.
Flea Control for Allergic Dogs and Cats
For some pets, fleas are just an annoyance. But when a pet is allergic to fleas or has other types of allergic skin disease, the need to control fleas is more critical.
Fleas: Know your Enemy
Fleas are not just a nuisance; they can kill, cause serious skin disease, and transmit infections and parasites.
Fur Mowing in Cats
Got a cat with a large balding spot? Wondering why the fur is falling out? Chances are excellent that the fur is not falling out at all; it is being licked off instead. Is the cat anxious? Obsessive? Maybe, but it is likely that the cat is just plain itchy. There is generally a medical approach to this problem.
Hemangioma in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiomas are a type of benign tumor of the blood vessels or skin
Hot Spots (Pyotraumatic Dermatitis) in Dogs and Cats
Hot spots are weepy, wet, red and sometimes bloody when they are fresh, and dry and scabby when they are resolving.
Hot Spots in Dogs and Cats
A hot spot is a superficial skin infection that results when the normal skin bacteria overrun the skin's defenses as a result of damage to the skin surface.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Lipomas in Dogs and Cats
Oftentimes a lump turns out to be "just a lipoma" or simply a fatty tumor and nothing to worry about.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Notoedric Mange in Cats (Feline Scabies)
Dogs get sarcoptic mange but what do cats get? It turns out they have their very own mange mite: Notoedres cati. Notoedric mange is a rarity worldwide and many veterinary dermatologists never see a single case in their entire careers.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Plasma Cell Pododermatitis (Pillow Foot) in Cats
Easy to recognize but not as easy to understand, this condition is often called pillow foot in cats for reasons that are obvious. This condition is described as rare. Most cats do not require treatment.
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
Pyoderma in Dogs and Cats
Pyoderma is caused by bacterial infection of the skin. The causative organism is almost always
Staphylococcus
. Bacteria will not usually cause disease on normal skin, but other underlying skin diseases cause some changes in the skin surface making it susceptible to infection, leading to pyoderma.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Ringworm in Dogs and Cats
Ringworm is not a worm at all but a fungal infection of the skin. It is contagious to humans, too. This FAQ provides answers.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Workups for Itchy Dogs and Cats
Itching, or pruritus, is the most common symptom of skin disease in pets. Many conditions can cause a pet to itch, including allergies, fleas, and other skin parasites.
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Digestive System
AAFCO Pet Food Labeling
Pet food labeling does not provide detailed nutritional information and it’s easily misunderstood by pet owners
Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats
There are about as many diet options for your pet as there are for you, so which one is best? Breed, age, weight, allergies, medical conditions, and finances are some of the contributing factors that need to be considered when choosing an alternative diet.
Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats
Loss of appetite is one of the most important criteria in determining if a pet is significantly ill or just having a minor malady. When the veterinarian says the pet has anorexia, it means the pet is not eating.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Cholangitis (Cholangiohepatitis) in Cats
The word cholangiohepatitis breaks down into "(bile), (vessel), hepat (liver) and (inflammation)." Putting this all together means inflammation of the liver and bile ducts. It is one of the four most common liver concerns in cats.
Cholangitis and Cholangiohepatitis in Cats
Cholangitis means inflammation of the biliary tree. Cholangiohepatitis means inflammation of the biliary tree and surrounding liver cells.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats
Colitis means inflammation of the colon and that spells diarrhea - often with fresh blood or mucus - and straining and discomfort for the pet, as well as a mess to clean up.
Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats
Difficulty in passing stool can mean extra effort (constipation) or complete impossibility (obstipation). Management can be surgical or with medication, depending on severity. Find out the difference, and find out what Megacolon is, too, on this informative page.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Gallstones in Dogs and Cats
Gallstones form because either the gallbladder isn’t functioning properly or something is wrong with the bile
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Hairballs (Trichobezoars) In Cats
If a cat is throwing up hairballs, there is more going on than most owners realize.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Hepatic Lipidosis (Fatty Liver Disease) in Cats
The liver failure cat is jaundiced, inappetent, frequently nauseated, and generally an obviously ill animal.
Hepatic Lipidosis in Cats
The primary disease that caused the problem also needs to be addressed
Infiltrative Bowel Disease in Cats
Chronic intestinal disease in cats can involve appetite loss, diarrhea, intestinal bleeding, vomiting, weight loss and debilitation. The intestinal tract does not lend itself to blood test evaluation so where do you go if intestinal disease is likely? Infiltration of the bowel by lymphocytes is a typical feature of the most common causes of chronic intestinal disease in cats.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats
Does your pet seem to have chronic vomiting or diarrhea? Those can be signs of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs
Irritable bowel syndrome is a psychosomatic disease. This means that it is the activity of the mind that causes the symptoms. Most people do not have difficulty imagining having so much anxiety that diarrhea results. Chronic anxiety can similarly result in chronic diarrhea. This is basically what irritable bowel syndrome is all about.
Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats
Pets, especially younger ones, have the unfortunate tendency to eat things they shouldn't and we aren't talking about food. Toys, socks, rocks and other materials find their way into pet stomachs but when the foreign body is a string, the consequences are especially dire.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Pancreatitis in Cats
Many people have heard of the pancreas but are not sure what it does, where it is, or what a disaster it can be when it gets inflamed.
Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats
A portosystemic shunt happens when a pet's venous blood from the intestine bypasses the liver. The pet can be born with the shunt or can get it later.
Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a rectal prolapse, you may have noticed that recently he's been spending a lot of time trying to poop
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Triaditis in Cats
Triaditis is a disease condition in cats in which they are simultaneously affected with three separate diseases: pancreatitis, cholangitis, and inflammatory bowel disease
Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens
An umbilical hernia is a condition in which abdominal contents (fat, intestines, etc.) protrude past the abdominal wall at the location where the umbilical cord was attached to the fetus.
Ears
Ear Infections (Otitis) in Dogs
Did you know the most common cause of recurrent ear infections is allergic skin disease? What do you do to keep the ear scratching and head shaking from becoming chronic?
Ear Mites in Dogs and Cats
This annoying parasite is a common source of ear infections, especially in cats and kittens. Where do they come from? How do you get rid of them?
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
Otitis Externa Treatment in Dogs and Cats
Otitis externa is an inflammation or infection of the external ear canal. Bacteria, yeast, ear mites, and allergies can all cause it. Addressing this problem involves four steps.
Total Ear Canal Ablation and Ventral Bulla Osteotomy (TECA) for End-Stage Ears in Dogs and Cats
In a TECA, all the diseased tissue including the entire ear canal, bones of the middle ear, etc., are simply removed and the healthy tissue around the ear is closed. This ends what has generally been a long tribulation of pain, odor, ear cleaning, and expensive veterinary medications and rechecks.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Endocrine: Diabetes, Thyroid, Adrenal
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease involving the body's handling of sugar. Learn about some of the basics of this common hormone problem of dogs and cats.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Dietary Therapy for Hyperthyroidism in Cats
A new commercial diet created for hyperthyroid cats is now available at your veterinarian's clinic. Where this diet fits in this picture and whether it should replace traditional therapy or be considered an acceptable last resort remain to be seen over time.
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats
Generally a high digestibility diet is the best choice for an EPI patient. These foods are low in fiber and fat and may be especially helpful for patients with trouble gaining weight. Many animals simply use enzymes mixed with their regular food.
Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
The goal in long-term management of diabetes mellitus is the alleviation of unpleasant clinical signs (constant thirst, weight loss etc.) and prevention of dangerous secondary conditions (infections, ketoacidosis, etc.). To accomplish this, blood sugar levels should be regulated between 250 mg/dl and 80 mg/dl. This is not as good as the body's natural regulation but it is a fair and achievable goal in most cases.
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats
Video and slides are provided for owners of diabetic cats who wish to learn how to conduct home tests that determine blood glucose (blood sugar) readings for their cat.
Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats
Elevated calcium starts with the bones. They receive an inappropriate message to mobilize their calcium. This message is either from excess parathyroid hormone or from high amounts of parathyroid hormone-related protein. When calcium is removed from the bones, all that is left is a fibrous scaffold, which is not really strong enough to support us. Our bones break, even fold.
Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats
Hyperlipidemia is a general term for disorders in which too many fat molecules (called lipids) circulate in the blood. The two most important lipids in pets are cholesterol and triglycerides.
Hyperthyroidism Medication for Cats (Methimazole)
The most common medication prescribed to treat feline hyperthyroidism is called methimazole (trade name Tapazole or Felimazole).
Hyperthyroidism Treatment Options in Cats
Three methods of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism are discussed.
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin is the injectable medication you use to control your diabetic cat's blood sugar. This beginner's guide will explain how to give your cat insulin injections.
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats
Monitoring is crucial to determining your pet's proper insulin dose. Much monitoring can be done at home; however, some tests simply must be done at the veterinarian's office.
Signs, Symptoms, and Diagnosis of Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Do you have an older cat who is losing weight despite having an excellent appetite? That is the hallmark sign of hyperthyroidism in cats.
Surgical Treatment for Feline Hyperthyroidism
Considering that the average hyperthyroid cat is a geriatric patient with special potential for high blood pressure and heart disease, quite a bit of patient preparation is necessary to reduce anesthetic risk.
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Thyroid Treatment Using Radiotherapy for Cats
This method of therapy is generally considered the safest and most effective method of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism.
Eyes
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Cataracts in Dogs and Cats
Cataracts are an important cause of blindness in the dog. Through special surgery, it may be possible to restore vision. Would you recognize a cataract if you saw one in your cat or dog?
Causes of Blindness in Dogs and Cats
Abnormalities in eye structures may lead to blindness
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Corneal Ulcers and Erosions in Dogs and Cats
A scratch or scrape on the eye is extremely painful, causing squinting, redness and excess tears.  What do you need to know about taking care of a pet with this condition? Read about the diagnosis and treatment of corneal ulcers and erosions.
Dry Eye (Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca) in Dogs and Cats
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or KCS, is a fancy way of saying the eye is dry. There are many causes of dry eye, but the most common one appears to be immune mediated destruction of the tear-producing gland tissue.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Eye Removal (Enucleation) in Pets
Enucleation means removal of the eye. What are the common reasons this procedure may be necessary, what can you expect after surgery, and what complications are possible?
Glaucoma in Dogs and Cats
Glaucoma is an eye disease that can cause significant pain and lead to blindness.
Haws Syndrome in Cats
Haws syndrome is an elevation of the third eyelid in both eyes.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Iris Coloboma in Dogs and Cats
The iris coloboma, which is relatively uncommon, does not affect vision, nor does it progress to anything else.
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) in Dogs
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) describes a group of inherited degenerative disorders of the retina that occur commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. Dogs eventually become blind, but remain happy and otherwise healthy.
Uveitis in Dogs and Cats
Uveitis is an inflammation of the dark tissues (uvea) of the eye
First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
A localized accumulation of pus, usually caused by an infection introduced from an animal bite or other penetrating wound.
Bandaging: First Aid
We use bandages for several reasons: to protect wounds from the environment, protect the environment from wounds, and to discourage the pet from licking or irritating a wound.
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Any insect sting or spider bite can cause problems for your pet.
Bleeding: First Aid
Learn how to stop bleeding in an emergency.
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
CPCR (formerly referred to as CPR) is the treatment required to save an animal or human life when suffering cardiopulmonary arrest.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Choking: First Aid
Choking is interference with breathing caused by foreign material in, or compression on, the trachea (windpipe).
Dehydration: First Aid
Excess loss of water from the body or inappropriate intake of water into the body.
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Suffocation caused by the filling of the lungs with water or other fluid. What to do?
Electrical Burns: First Aid
It is imperative that you do not touch the pet until the electrical source has been turned off or moved. Electricity can flow through your pet and affect you as well.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fainting and dizziness may be associated with anything from low blood sugar to severe heart disease.
Fever: First Aid
Fever is the elevation of body temperature in response to infection or inflammation.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
The elevation of body temperature above normal. It is sometimes indicative of a fever, but it can also be associated with severe conditions such as heat stroke or heat prostration.
Hypothermia: First Aid
When a pet's body temperature dips below 100.5 degrees, the pet is too cold and must be warmed.
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Dogs frequently carry sticks in their mouths and suffer impalements when an end of the stick jams into the ground.
Introduction: First Aid
VeterinaryPartner.com has provided this complete reference book online for you to browse through, expanding your knowledge of Dog & Cat First Aid.
Nosebleed: First Aid
If the nose is bleeding profusely and/or the bleeding lasts more than 5 minutes, seek veterinary attention.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
To identify an illness or abnormal situation, you must first be able to recognize what is normal for your pet.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
What can you do to prevent a crisis?
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Shock: First Aid
The term shock can mean different things to different people, and medical professionals still debate the true meaning of the word. Regardless of cause, shock is life-threatening and requires immediate attention and treatment.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Sunburn: First Aid
Damage to the tissues caused by exposure to the sun's rays.
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
The first aid provider must not only identify and treat injury or illness, but must also safely transport the patient to the veterinary facility for treatment.
Wound Care for Pets
Wounds bigger than a small cut are almost always worse than they look
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Wrapping Up First Aid
If you have questions, seek advice from a veterinarian.
Infections: Bacteria, Fungi, Viruses, Parasites
Abscesses from Bite Wounds
At most clinics, a week doesn't go by without seeing a cat or two in this condition. Cats fight, bite, and get infected. What do you need to know?
Anaplasmosis
Anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease. Two forms of anaplasmosis are known: granulocytic anaplasmosis and infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia.A dog can have both infections at the same time
Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne
Signs can include poor appetite and fever. Joints are commonly affected,
Antibiotic Use in Pets
Antibiotics are useless against viruses and will not cure viral infections. Previously, people and pets with viruses were given preventive antibiotics to prevent secondary infections, but this approach is not favored anymore because of the bacteria's ability to develop antibiotic resistance.
Aspergillosis in Cats
Aspergillosis infections in cats are rare and most commonly seen in cats with a poor immune system
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Bartonella and Cat Scratch Fever
Most people know very little about this infection other than it involves a fever spread by cat scratches. In fact, it involves infection by a bacterium called Bartonella henselae, which is spread by fleas.
Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats
Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that affects dogs and cats. Blastomycosis appears in only certain geographic areas in North America, most often the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence River valleys. Infection with Blastomyces occurs when a cat or dog inhales the fungal spores into the lungs.
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Cats and Ferrets Had SARS in Laboratory Setting
The big SARS outbreak ended in 2003, but several smaller outbreaks were reported in 2004, and public health officials expected further outbreaks in the future. However, as of November, 2017, the WHO and the CDC both indicate that there have not been any more cases of SARS reported anywhere in the world.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Clostridium difficile Becoming more Common in North America
It is unclear if C. difficile can be transmitted from pets to people. The types of C. difficile found in pets are often the same as those found in people, including the epidemic strain ribotype 027/NAP1. So it makes sense that C. difficile could potentially be transmitted between people and animals, but there is still no conclusive proof.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
COVID-19 in a Tiger
Don’t over-react
Cryptosporidium is a Particularly Challenging Type of Coccidia for Pets
Cryptosporidium are similar to Coccidia and, until recent advances in molecular biology showed us otherwise, they were believed to be simply another species of Coccidia. They have some particularly unpleasant features.
Cytauxzoonosis in Cats
Cytauxzoon felis is spread by tick bites. This condition has a very high mortality rate.
Distemper (Panleukopenia) in Cats
Feline distemper, caused by a parvovirus, is a life-threatening disease. The virus is considered ubiquitous, meaning it is in virtually every place that is not regularly disinfected. The infection is highly contagious among unvaccinated cats, usually kittens and young adult cats living in groups. Barn cats, feral colonies, animal shelter groups, pet stores, and rescue facilities are high risk for outbreaks.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a deadly infection in cats that is caused by the FIP virus. The disease occurs most commonly in young cats, although it can infect older cats too.
Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV)
Feline leukemia virus, a retrovirus, is a common infection of cats. It is the cause of more cat deaths, directly or indirectly, than any other organism and is widespread in the cat population.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Flea Control for Dogs and Cats
Fleas are the most common external parasite of companion animals. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most common skin disease of dogs and cats! In order to help select the most appropriate products to achieve a flea-free existence for an allergic pet, learn about the life cycle of the flea.
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats
Histoplasmosis is a dangerous disease caused by fungus
Hookworms in Cats and Dogs
The adult hookworm lives in the small intestine of its host. It hangs on to the intestinal wall using its six sharp teeth and unlike other worms that just absorb the digested food through their skin as it passes by, the hookworm drinks its host's blood. Humans can get hookworms too.
How Toxoplasmosis Affects Your Cat
You have probably heard the warnings given to pregnant women about the parasite toxoplasmosis, advising against cleaning litterboxes and the dangers of ingesting raw/undercooked meat or milk products. But should you be concerned about how this parasite affects your cat?
Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
In hydrometra and mucometra, the fluid is sterile and there is no infection. Only pyometra is an infection
Infectious Anemia in Cats
The infected cat's immune system is busy coating infected red blood cells with antibodies. Coated red blood cells are removed from the circulation by the spleen. This kills the organism, and the iron is harvested and recycled into new red blood cells. The problem is that so many red blood cells are being destroyed that the cat becomes anemic.
Lice in Dogs and Cats
When lice are found, it is usually in the dogs that are living in or were obtained from filthy, crowded conditions.
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats
MRSA is the abbreviation for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats
In dogs and cats, the most common conditions associated with MRSA tend to be skin infections, post-operative incisional infections and wound infections. The bacteria have also been isolated from the urinary tract, auditory canal, skin, eye and joints.
Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats
Physaloptera
are rare but most common in the Midwestern U.S., particularly in pets with access to the outdoors
Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pyothorax is one of those conditions where prognosis is reasonably good (assuming the patient is not too far gone at the time of presentation) as long as aggressive treatment is pursued. If one tries to go with inexpensive alternatives to proper treatment, a poor outcome is likely.
Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses
Pythiosis occurs in dogs and horses more often than in cats.
Rabies in Animals
Descriptions of rabies go back thousands of years as rabies has classically been one of the most feared infections of all time. Rabies is a serious disease, but fortunately it can also be easily prevented in dogs and cats by proper vaccination.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Roundworms In Cats And Kittens
This common parasite can cause diarrhea and vomiting in cats and dogs, and some pet owners become very concerned when their pet expels a worm up to seven inches in length. Roundworms are also one of the few dog or cat parasites that can be dangerous when transmitted to humans.
Taenia Species Tapeworms in Dogs and Cats
We have generated some confusion regarding tapeworms not contracted from fleas. There actually is another tapeworm besides the common tapeworm whose segments might be seen on a pet's anal area or on their feces.
Tapeworms (Dipylidium caninum) in Dogs and Cats
Noticing something like grains of rice that move, something that looks like sesame seeds in your pet's bedding? Where do tapeworms come from, how can you eliminate them, and why do they come back?
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Tritrichomonas Infection Causes Diarrhea in Cats
Kittens and cats living in groups have an assortment of infectious diseases to contend with.
Tritrichomonas blagburni
is yet another infectious organism yielding diarrhea in cats.
Tritrichomoniasis in Cats
Begin Typing Here!
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
When You Need Antibiotics for Your Pets, and When You Don’t
Antibiotics can be literal life savers for your pet when prescribed and used for the kind of infection that responds to the medication. But when given for something where they are not appropriate — such as a virus — antibiotics can create a long-lasting problem of antibiotic resistance.
Whipworm Infection in Dogs and Cats
The whipworm of dogs is substantially smaller than the other worms (a mere 30-50 mm in length, about a half inch maximum). The "head" (or more accurately the digestive end of the worm) is skinny vs. its stout tail (or reproductive end) which gives the worm a whip shape, hence the name.
Nervous System: Brain, Nerves & Spinal Cord
Ataxia in Dogs and Cats
Ataxia is a symptom caused by some type of central nervous system problem in which the brain cannot correctly tell the body what to do. It is an inability to make normal, coordinated, voluntary movements.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cerebellar Hypoplasia Cats Are Clumsy from Birth
A cat with this disease clearly has balance issues: he walks with his legs widely placed for fear of falling, and places his feet clumsily. He often leans against walls for support. Sitting still, he may look like a fairly normal cat but once focused, tremors begin getting more wobbly as concentration becomes more intense. Despite the obvious impairment, cats with this condition are happy, able to feed themselves and use a litter box, and are felt to have good life quality.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Cognitive Dysfunction Syndrome in Dogs
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS) is essentially the dog equivalent of Alzheimer's disease
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Horner's Syndrome in Cats and Dogs
Slight squint, small pupil, raised third eyelid... it all looks pretty strange, as if something is wrong with the eye. In fact, it is not the eye itself that is the problem, but rather it is a nerve problem. Read more about this symptom and its causes.
Hydrocephalus (Water on the Brain) in Dogs and Cats
This condition literally means "water head" and is more commonly referred to as water on the brain. The central nervous system is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid that is secreted by chambers inside the brain. When fluid builds up, there is no room in the brain for extra volume and disaster can result. This condition is particularly common in dome-headed puppies.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Hyperesthesia syndrome is felt to be a type of compulsive disorder, usually initiated when the cat is in conflict. The cat wants to perform one behavior but is prevented from doing so and ultimately in frustration performs another behavior. After a while, this second behavior, which frequently is grooming, is performed compulsively.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Feline Hyperesthesia syndrome (FHS) means “too much feeling”, hyperesthesia is the opposite of anesthesia which means a lack of feeling or no sensation at all.
Manx Syndrome in Cats
Manx syndrome (sacrocaudal dysgenesis, sacrocaudal agenesis) is an array of problems involving the function of the hind legs, urinary bladder, and colon of a tailless cat. In affected cats, the spine and spinal cord are shortened because the last few vertebrae and spinal segments have not developed normally
Myasthenia Gravis in Dogs and Cats
Myasthenia gravis is a disease that interrupts the way nerves communicate with muscles. There is no treatment for the congenital form. The acquired form, which is an autoimmune disease, is treated medically with immunosuppressive agents.
Neuropathic Pain in Dogs and Cats
People who experience neuropathic pain describe it as "a pins and needles sensation," tingling, burning, itching, numbness or cold, and sometimes feeling as if they had received a small electric shock. Grades of neuropathic pain that have been established in human medicine are definite, probable and possible. Pets cannot describe their pain to us but we believe it's likely to be like what people have.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Seizure Disorders in Cats
Seizures are sudden fits of uncontrollable movement and can include twitching, shaking, and/or muscle spasms
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Serotonin Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Serotonin syndrome is a serious drug reaction to medications that build up high levels of serotonin in the body. Serotonin syndrome can be a life-threatening situation, therefore if you think your pet is developing it, visit a veterinarian immediately.
Spina Bifida in Dogs and Cats
The spinal cord is surrounded and protected by a bony tube made up of
a series of bones called vertebrae, linked together by intervertebral discs, ligaments, and muscles. This entire complex is referred to as the "spine.” Sometimes, abnormal growth and development of the spine happen before birth with both puppies and kittens, resulting in a spinal defect called Spina Bifida.
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Traumatic Brain Injury in Dogs and Cats
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) occurs when a sudden event, such as a blow or fall, happens to the head. In both humans and animals, a head injury severe enough to damage the brain is referred to as traumatic brain injury or TBI.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Nose & Sinuses
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Nasal Pharyngeal Polyps in Cats
Naso-pharyngeal polyps are the most common masses that are seen in the external ear canal in cats. They are benign growths.
Rhinitis in Dogs and Cats
Rhinitis is the inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose. It can occur by itself or as part of an upper respiratory illness/infection.
Nutrition-related
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not anyone's friend. The failing kidney is no longer good at getting rid of excess phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the blood begin to rise.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs
Calcium is such a crucial component of our biochemistry that virtually any complete blood panel, whether human or veterinary, will include a measurement of calcium. Our bodies go to tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within a narrow range. We need a storage source to draw upon for when we need more circulating calcium as well as a system to unload excess.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Weight Loss for Obese Cats
Obesity is a preventable and treatable disease
Orthopedic: Bones, Joints & Muscles
Amputation is Preferable to Continued Pain
A letter from a veterinarian points out that amputation is far better than continued pain or euthanasia.
Arthritis in Dogs and Cats: What Can be Done?
Arthritis, also known as osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease, is a degenerative, progressive, and irreversible condition of the joints.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Diskospondylitis (Intervertebral Disk Infection) in Dogs and Cats
Diskospondylitis is a bacterial/fungal infection that can reach the intervertebral disks several ways.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Fractures in Dogs and Cats
If this article has caught your attention, it may be that your pet has had the misfortune of suffering a fractured bone. This is a traumatic experience for both you and your pet and there are a few things you should know to help both of you make the best of a bad situation!
Hemivertebrae are Congenitally Deformed Vertebra in Dogs and Cats
A hemivertebra is a congenitally deformed vertebra. Hemivertebrae of the tail are not a problem as there is no spinal cord tissue that far down.
Hip Dislocation in Dogs and Cats
Hip dislocation is the common term for the separation of the femoral head from the pelvic acetabulum. In order for the hip to dislocate, trauma must be severe enough to break the capital ligament.
Medications for Degenerative Arthritis in Dogs and Cats
Arthritis pain causes discomfort and loss of mobility in aged pets, and there are numerous remedies on the market. Which ones can be combined? Which are proven reliable and which may only work in some individuals?
Normal Joints Look Like This in Dogs and Cats
A pet does not have to be a senior citizen to require joint care supplements or physical therapy. Degenerative arthritis can result from an injury or can be the result of genetics and joint conformation.
Solensia™ (Frunevetmab Injection):  An Arthritis Medication Just for Cats
Solensia™ is an injectable medication specifically designed to treat cats for discomfort from arthritis.
Spondylosis Deformans in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, spondylosis deformans occurs most often along lower back (lumbar) vertebrae. In cats, it tends to occur more often in the chest (thoracic) vertebrae.
Tail Pull Injuries in Cats
Cats get their tails pulled or broken through an assortment of traumas. One might think a tail break would involve an obvious external wound but usually this is not the case; instead, nerve damage (from stretching of the cauda equina nerves) is the usual tip-off.
Reproductive System
Cryptorchidism (Retained Testicles) in Dogs and Cats
Cryptorchidism is a condition in which a male’s testicles have not descended (dropped) into the scrotum. Some cryptorchid animals are sterile and some are not.
Ovarian Remnant Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
The spayed female pet has no ovaries and should not display any signs of a heat cycle but what happens if she does anyway? Where might these hormones be coming from?
Paraphimosis and Phimosis in Dogs and Cats
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the penis, but it is not an erection. It is quite painful and thus medically urgent. Priapism is the inability to extend the penis beyond the sheath. Phimosis is rare, and is either congenital or acquired. Paraphimosis and phimosis are flip sides of the same coin, although they are not the same thing, nor are they treated the same way.
Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
Pyometra is the life-threatening infection of the uterus that generally occurs in middle-aged to older female dogs in the 6 weeks following heat. A uterus with pyometra swells dramatically and is filled with pus, bacteria, dying tissue, and toxins. Without treatment, the pet is expected to die.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Respiratory System: Lungs & Airways
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats
Most people have heard the term pneumonia and know it is a lung infection of some sort. In fact, pneumonia is not a very specific term and essentially means "lung inflammation of some sort." Pneumonia is an inflammation in deep lung tissues where oxygen is absorbed into the body and waste gases are removed. It has potential to be life-threatening regardless of its cause.
Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pneumothorax may result from chest trauma, excessive pressure on the lungs, or underlying lung disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, etc.). In some cases, the cause is never discovered.
Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonic stenosis is the third most common congenital heart disease in dogs. It can be accompanied by additional heart defects to create a constellation of disaster or it can be mild enough to be no more than a surprising incidental finding.
Urinary System: Bladder & Kidneys
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats
Most calcium oxalate stones develop in cats between ages 5 and 14 years. 35% of cats with calcium oxalate bladder stones have elevated blood calcium (hypercalcemia). Burmese and Himalayan cats appear genetically predisposed to the development of calcium oxalate bladder stones.
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats
While struvite bladder stones can sometimes be found incidentally while looking into another problem, most of the time they are found when the cat is showing signs of lower urinary tract disease.
Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats
Usually a surgery called cystotomy is necessary to remove bladder stones.
Blocked Cats are an Emergency
In advanced cases, where the urine flow has been stopped for more than 24 hours, cats can become systemically ill from retained toxins and start vomiting, or become very weak and lethargic. Death usually happens within 48 hours, and it's not a pleasant way to go.
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin
Chronic kidney, or renal, failure is common among geriatric pets. As treatment frequently is long term, owners should understand their options. Topics discussed include definitions, medications used in treatment, diagnostics/helpful testing, and monitoring.
Ectopic Ureters in Dogs
If your puppy has an ectopic ureter or even two, the only chance at resolving the incontinence is through surgery. This is expensive and often unsuccessful so it is important to know what you are getting into.
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
In glomerular disease, holes are punched out in the filtration system, allowing molecules that the body needs to keep entering the urine flow and be urinated away. Chronic inflammation leads to the holes in the filtration system.
Idiopathic Cystitis in Cats
Formerly known as FUS or FLUTD, feline idiopathic cystitis simply means bladder inflammation of unknown cause. It is a set of symptoms that cannot be classified as a disease.
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet?
Most every animal hospital can provide diuresis: a therapy where extra fluid beyond what the patient can drink is provided, thus giving the kidney its medium so that it can remove toxic waste. This works well but there comes a time when even with plenty of fluids, the sick kidney simply cannot get the toxins out. For most patients this is the end of the line. In fact, dialysis may be another choice, though it is substantially more expensive than diuresis and dialysis centers for pets are still few and far between.
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
To the uninitiated, the impression may be that once your cat or dog receives a new kidney, life is renewed and all the kidney problems are solved. In fact, this is hardly the case. Immune-suppressive medications are needed to prevent rejection of the new organ, not to mention infection and other issues. A kidney transplant is a big deal regardless of the species of the recipient.
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats
Lithotripsy is a funny word for a minimally invasive alternative to urinary stone removal surgery.
Lower Urinary Tract Disease in Cats (also known as FLUTD)
Just about any inflammatory condition in the feline lower urinary tract creates the same collection of signs. Tumor, infection, bladder stone etc. all create the same clinical picture.
Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats
With polyuria (PU) the body makes more urine than normal, which in turn causes a condition called polydipsia (PD), which means your dog or cat is extra thirsty because they are trying to stay hydrated. What are the reasons for these conditions?
Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats
Pyelonephritis is an inflammation of the kidney that frequently shows no symptoms and thus it is not usually recognized until the signs become severe. It may not be diagnosed until histopathology is done on the kidney after the pet's death.
Sterile Cystitis (Pandora Syndrome) in Cats
Also known as Feline Interstitial Cystitis, Feline Idiopathic Cystitis, FIC. Cystitis may result from a bacterial infection or bladder stones. Dogs rarely get sterile cystitis, while it’s quite common among young to middle-aged cats.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Urinary Blockage in Cats
Every owner of a male cat should be familiar with this emergency condition. The recognition of straining to urinate is the key. Urine flow must be re-established by trained veterinary personnel to prevent death.
Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats
The urinary tract infection (UTI) is one of the most common ailments in small animal practices.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Care and Husbandry
Breeding & Baby Animal Care
Caring for Orphaned Kittens
Although nothing can replace the care from a feline mama, there are steps you can take to become an excellent foster parent until the kittens are ready to face the world.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Feline Pregnancy and Kitten Birth
Too often a litter of kittens comes as an almost total surprise.  One day you notice that the cute little girl kitten from last fall is a bit round in the middle only the very next spring. No one got around to spaying her and she seemed too young for - er - adult entertainment. What happens when cats give birth?
How to Find a Good, Responsible Breeder
A responsible breeder is one who cares about their animals-and you as their potential family-more than their own profit. Here are some ideas on how to find a good one.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Orphan Puppy & Kitten Care
Spring is kitten season. If you have some unexpected additions to your family and are not sure what to do, orphan care is not that hard when you know what to do.
Pregnancy Termination in Dogs and Cats
Unwanted pet pregnancy happens and some choices have to be made. Let's review your options: Have the babies, spay during pregnancy, or medical abortion.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Spaying your Female Cat
Spaying your pet cat is also very important, not only to keep down pet overpopulation, but for your personal mental health, as well! It is also good for the cat... Here is a list of Frequently Asked Questions about this procedure.
Diet & Nutrition
Behavior Supplements in Dogs and Cats
Many colleagues and pet owners ask about the use of supplements in the treatment of behavioral issues. There is limited documented evidence on the use of these supplements, but to address this demand for information, here is what we know is being used and impressions from what experience and data are available.
Canned Food Transition for Cats Addicted to Dry Food
There are few things in life more frustrating than dealing with a finicky cat. Cats can be incredibly 'set in their ways' when it comes to their dietary preferences. Cats, like children, often resist what is best for them. The transition process often involves much more than just plunking down a new food item. Time, patience, and tricks are often required.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Nutrition for Your Cat
Cats' overall health can be significantly improved with a high-protein canned food diet to help maintain good hydration.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Omega Three Fatty Acids for our Pets
Cold water fish oils are an excellent source of DHA and EPA for pets.
People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets
While it is okay to share an occasional tidbit with your pet, learn which ones should not be shared at all.
Environment
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Treating your Yard for Fleas and Ticks
To treat fleas and ticks, the yard must be treated as well as your pets and home
Winter Holiday Hazards for Pets
Here are some tips for keeping your pets out of danger during the holiday season.
General Care: Vaccines & More
Declawing and Alternatives for Cats
Here is some factual information about declawing, as well as some nonsurgical alternatives.
De-Skunking Your Dog or Cat
Getting sprayed by a skunk happens to curious dogs who stick their noses into places that annoy skunks. It happens to cats, too, just not nearly as often. Unless your pet has been skunked, you may not realize that the odor stuck to your pet is not the same minor one that you smell driving down a road where a skunk has released its scent. The up close and personal smell won’t just make you wrinkle your nose and gag a bit; it’s a bit like the acrid smell of burning rubber or chemical fire that grasps your lungs and hurts your eyes.
Giving Oral Medications to Dogs and Cats
Sadly, some estimates of veterinary compliance are as low as 20% to 30%, which means many pets aren't healing as well as they could be, and money is being spent for little value.
Microchipping Could Save your Pet's Life
A microchip can reunite you with a lost pet, serve as proof of ownership in a dispute, or even mean the difference between euthanasia and medical care in an emergency. A chip can be implanted in a matter of seconds while you wait.
Nail Trims for Adult Cats
Nail Trims in Kittens
Neutering your Male Cat
This is probably the simplest surgical procedure your veterinarian will do. Click here to find out what exactly is done, how it helps, and what to expect about recovery.
Pet Treats...What to Look Out For
Salmonella-contaminated pig ear treats are historically the main offender, but any animal-based treat that is not processed to kill pathogens (e.g. cooking, pasteurization, irradiation) is a concern.
Pilling a Cat
Many cats know you are waiting to see the licking motions and will try to fool you. If the pill is still in the mouth when you check, just reach a finger in and tip the pill further back on the tongue or allow the cat to spit the pill out and begin again.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Senior Cats' Health Issues
A cat's health changes with age. Physical and mental changes occur, just as they do with people. Most older cats sleep more than they did when young, and they usually sleep more deeply. They may not be able to jump quite as high. They may lose or gain weight, depending on their metabolism.
Sunscreen for Pets
Sunscreen can and should be used on cats and dogs. Animals that have light-colored noses and thin, very short, or missing fur are most in need of protective sunscreen.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Traveling with Pets
Vaccine Information for Dogs, Cats, Puppies and Kittens
Vaccination is an important part of a pet's health and it should not be skipped over. If cost is a problem there are several approaches one may take but each has advantages and disadvantages.
Vaccine Titers for Pets
Use of vaccine titers is increasing as they become more affordable and easier to measure
What First Time Cat Owners Should Know
Each cat has their own preferences and it's a learning process for you to find out what they are
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Toxicities
Household & Environmental Substances
Common Household Items Can Poison Pets
Thousands of cats and dogs needlessly suffer and many die each year by accidental ingestion of household poisons.
Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of Antifreeze and Your Pets
Would you know what to do if your pet got into antifreeze?
Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause Obstructions in Pets
Unfortunately, if a pet swallows glue with MDI in it, such as Gorilla Glue, the warm and moist environment of the stomach causes the glue to foam and expand into a large mass that must be removed surgically.
Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
The most common cause of lead poisoning in pets is ingestion of lead-based paint. Although lead-based paint is no longer available in the United States, it was used in buildings for many years.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats
The traditional anticoagulant rodenticides had an antidote in case of accidental poisoning, but there is no antidote to bromethalin, and bromethalin products are tasty to dogs and cats.
Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats
There are several types of rodenticides available. The traditional products are called anticoagulant rodenticides and are discussed here. If one intends to use a rodenticide we encourage you to choose this type over others as there is a readily available antidote for the anti-coagulant rodenticides. Other rodenticides are more toxic and no antidote is available.
Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets
Which common cleaning and disinfecting products can be problematic in our pets?
Human Foods, & Recreational Substances
Cannabis Toxicity in Pets
Cannabis generally refers to the products of the Cannabis sativa plant, commonly known as marijuana and has been safely used medically for centuries.
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Nicotine Poisoning in Pets
Everyone knows the Surgeon General's warning about cigarette smoking but what about cigarette eating? Nicotine poisoning is a real concern anywhere that a pet may find cigarettes, nicotine gums, nicotine patches, e-cigarette filter cartridges, e-liquid, or e-juice. Dogs, particularly puppies, tend to chew things up first and ask questions later.
Yeast Dough Dangers in Pets
The buildup of gas and rising dough in the stomach is painful and can lead to bloat
Medications & Supplements
Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
Ibuprofen is felt to be too toxic for safe use in pets at any dose but if a pet is lucky, exposure will not have reached the toxic dose but it may not take much given that the typical non-prescription pill contains 200 mg.
Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Now that pennies are made of zinc instead of copper, swallowing them can be harmful to your pet. Many veterinarians are unaware of this syndrome and do not realize that pennies are far more than a simple foreign body. This is a recently described disease and many questions are still unanswered.
Poisonous Plants & Venomous Animals
Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
If you did not witness your pet eating a mushroom, you will likely notice when they start feeling sick
Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats
17 plants that are poisonous to dogs or cats from the ASPCA Poison Control Center.
Safe and Toxic Garden Plant Images
This is a collection of images linked to from the Safe Gardening page.
Safe Gardening for Dogs and Cats
The garden shops and catalogs are full of gorgeous garden shrubs and flowers. They tell us how to water and how much sunshine is needed, but rarely do they tell us if the plant is pet safe.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Toxic and Non-toxic Plants
This list contains plants that have not been reported as having systemic effects on the animals or as having intense effects on the gastrointestinal tract.
Behavior
Aggression, Anxiety & Fear
Car Ride Anxiety in Dogs and Cats
Many love to take their dog on errands and fun adventures in the car. Some even take their cats. Some dogs and cats become anxious in the car with others refusing to enter the car at all. What can we do
Fear of Noises in Dogs and Cats
Often, combinations of treatment methods are needed
Fear-related Aggression in Cats
Just like us, cats feel fear, and their behavior changes in response to it. What makes one cat fearful or anxious may not make another one feel that way.
Feline Play and Play Aggression
Cats are social animals and enjoy interactions with the humans in their lives.
Halloween is a Scary Night for Pets
While Halloween isn't as noisy or frightening as the Fourth of July. for pets it's likely in second place as Scariest Holiday of the Year. Keeping your pets away from the frenetic parts of the celebration is in both your best interests.
Human Directed Aggression in Cats
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
PTSD Can Occur in Companion Animals after Disasters
Dogs and cats who survive disasters can suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder in the same way as their owners and for the same reasons.
Puppies and Kittens Who Bite
Biting and mouthing may be normal for puppies and kittens, but continuing to bite into adulthood can lead to issues.
Territorial Marking in Cats
Territorial marking, also known as urine marking or spraying in cats, is the act of purposefully urinating in an area as a way of communicating.
Using Medication to Lower Veterinary Visit Stress in Dogs and Cats
They anticipate something bad happening, so the anxiety starts sooner and sooner.
Enrichment & Exercise
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Mealtime Enrichment for Cats
Food enrichment provides physical and behavioral wellbeing for the cat and enjoyment for the family.
General
Cat Body Language
One of the best things you can do to strengthen your relationship with your cat is to understand their body launguage. By understanding their language, we can improve our relationship with them and interpret relationships between cats within our home.
Body Language of Cats
Often a cat's body language can be used to display multiple emotions. Thus, when trying to figure out your cat is saying, try to understand the context in which he is communicating.
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
Feline House-soiling
Once medical conditions are ruled out, house-soiling can be broken down into two main categories: Inappropriate elimination (toileting) or marking (spraying)
Inappropriate Elimination
House-training problems - called inappropriate elimination - are the number one cause of behavior-related complaints from cat lovers - and with good reason.
Inappropriate Elimination (House-Soiling) in Cats
Does your cat seem to forget where the real litter box is and instead use an imaginary litter box in the middle of the living room rug? This could be caused by medical or behavioral problems.
Understanding your Cat’s Body Language
Introducing New Experiences
Getting your Cat into a Carrier
If you get upset or angry, your cat will likely get upset too. Remain calm.
How to Make Veterinary Visits Less Stressful
How to Prepare Your Cat for a Low Stress Handling® Blood Draw Visit
Veterinary visits can be stressful for everyone. Low-Stress Handling® Principles of Handling provide an opportunity for you to help your veterinarian to perform a safer and more thorough physical exam.
Introducing the New Baby to Your Cat
Some cats interact really well with new babies and will continue their lives as if nothing has changed. For many cats, however, changes associated with a new baby in the house can be a difficult adjustment and may result in stress or anxiety.
Training Your Cat to Use the Carrier
Cats learn by association, so the sudden appearance of the carrier tends to signal that something scary is happening. Training cats to love their carriers is beneficial for many reasons. The key is to build and maintain a positive association with the carrier to make your cat’s visit to the veterinarian as low stress as possible.
Training
Desensitization and Counterconditioning to Nail Trimmers for Cats
Importance of Socializing Puppies and Kittens
Socialization is getting puppies and kittens used to people, other animals, and experiences that they will encounter frequently in their adult lives.
Traveling with Your Cat
At some point, you and your cat will need to travel. You may feel stressed by the idea, but with a bit of effort and planning, cats can learn to cope with the trip. Preparing your cat beforehand can make the experience less stressful for both of you.
What Is Cooperative Care in Veterinary Medicine?
Diseases and Conditions
Allergies & Immune System
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats
We get hay fever; dogs get itchy skin. This condition is usually seasonal - but not always - and many treatments are available. Find out the causes and what you can do to relieve your pet's discomfort.
Asthma in Cats
If your cat needs to open its mouth to breathe or if its abdomen moves excessively as it breathes (and it is not purring), then it may be suffering from feline asthma. Asthma is a recurring respiratory compromise that occurs when the lung airways constrict either spontaneously or in response to stimuli that normally should not cause a reaction.
Atopic Dermatitis in Cats
You or someone you know may have allergies, but did you know your cat can too?
Many conditions besides allergies can cause your cat to be
itchy.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats
Dust mites feed off of skin scales and dander shed by humans and animals. Mites love bedding, carpeting, and anywhere they can find a hiding place with the likelihood of skin dander being present. Dust mites also require a relatively high humidity in the home to truly thrive.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT)
Platelets can be mistaken by the immune system as invaders. When this happens, antibodies coat the platelets and the spleen's phagocytes remove them in numbers up to 10 times greater than the normal platelet removal rate.
Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses
Most people know someone who gets periodic "allergy shots" for airborne allergies. What this means is that an individually-made serum is created using small amounts of allergens (proteins against which the person reacts). It works for dogs and cats, too.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats
There has never been a class of drug that has more application in disease treatment than the glucocorticoid class. Indeed, this group is rivaled only by antibiotics in lives saved. But side effects from the glucocorticoid group are numerous and can be classified into those seen with short-term use and those seen in long-term use.
Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats
Immunization represents stimulation of the immune system, an inherently inflammatory process. Vaccination reactions severe enough to produce shock are
extremely
rare and are a function of an individual pet's immune response.
Blood-related
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) in Dogs and Cats
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an extreme complication of numerous already life-threatening conditions leading to the deregulation of the body's natural mechanisms of blood clotting and blood clot dissolving.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Cats
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, or NI, is a rare immune-mediated disease that is caused when newborn kittens with type A blood drink colostrum from a mother with type B blood.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats
There are three important ways in which the kidney patient loses red blood cells. The first way is bone marrow suppression. The second way is bleeding. The third way is called hemodilution. Maintaining a stable red blood cell quantity keeps the patient energetic and spirited and is crucial to staying alive.
Thrombocytopenia in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a condition called thrombocytopenia, his platelet count is low. When the platelet count is low, it is harder for clotting to occur.
Cancers, Lumps & Bumps
Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals
But it still seems to shock people to learn that dogs, cats, rabbits, rats and a host of other domestic species can get breast cancer, too. Since the aim of Breast Cancer Awareness Month is to raise awareness, our aim here is to wave the flag for those who can’t speak for themselves and raise awareness of mammary cancer in companion animals. We also want people to know that breast cancer and mammary gland cancer are the same disease; it’s just called by a different name in other species.
Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent
Cancer cells go mad systematically. The cellular delinquents bust past the body's natural immune system, as though a gate was left open, burgeoning into abnormal cells.
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs
These drugs are typically used to treat lymphoma.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiosarcoma has three classic locations: skin and subcutaneous forms, splenic forms, and heart-based forms. With the exception of the skin form, which can often be eliminated by surgery, a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma is bad news.
Injection Site Sarcoma (Cancer) in Cats
Fibrosarcomas have been recognized for a very long time as difficult, deeply rooted tumors of cats. What has only recently been recognized is the potential for vaccination to lead to the formation of these tumors.
Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats
Unfortunately, most insulinomas in dogs and cats are malignant. This is bad news but the good news is that regardless of this fact, surgery is still helpful as the bulk of the tumor (if not all of it) can be removed.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Some lung tumors are benign, and some are not
Lymphoma
This form of cancer, also called lymphosarcoma, is the most common malignancy of dogs, cats, and humans. A plentitude of information is available, information that is necessary in order to make intelligent decisions about an affected pet.
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma accounts for one third of all cancers developed by cats. When the mediastinal lymph nodes become infiltrated with lymphoma, a mass is apparent in the mediastinum and a cancerous fluid fills the chest, restricting breathing. The fluid can be tapped but it will be back without treatment.
Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs
There are three types of skin lymphoma: mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Mammary Tumors in Cats
In cats with mammary tumors, approximately 90% are malignant with rapid spread to adjacent glands and the nearest set of lymph nodes.
Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Most mast cell tumors arise in the skin but technically they can arise anywhere that mast cells are found. Mast cell tumors are notoriously invasive and difficult to treat.
Meningioma in Dogs and Cats
Meningioma is the most common brain tumor of cats and dogs. Meningiomas are generally benign. In dogs, seizures are the most common sign. In cats, signs are more vague and consist of listlessness and behavior changes.
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The oral squamous cell carcinoma does not spread as you normally think of a cancer spreading, but it is so locally invasive that it carries a poor prognosis. The only hope of good survival comes from early detection. Learn what to look for and what important risk factors are.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The squamous cell carcinoma is not only the most common oral malignancy in cats, it has one of the poorest outcomes.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
When squamous cell carcinoma occurs in the mouth and throat, it's called oral squamous cell carcinoma. In these oral cases, the lesion is usually located on the gums or tonsils.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
The transitional cell carcinoma is a particularly unpleasant tumor of the urinary bladder that usually grows in the lower neck of the bladder, causing a partial or complete obstruction to urination. Bloody urine and straining to urinate are typically the signs noted by the owner.
Cardiac & Circulatory System: Heart & Blood Vessels
Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats
Atrial fibrillation (sometimes called "A fib") is an arrhythmia, an irregularity of the heart's rhythm.
Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Cardiomyopathy means heart muscle disease.
Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats
In congestive heart failure, fluid is retained in specific parts of the body, depending on the side of the heart that is diseased.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most common acquired heart diseases in dogs.  DCM is a disease of the heart muscle.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats
A heart murmur is one of several types of abnormal sounds your veterinarian can hear when listening to your pet's heart with a stethoscope. The murmur itself is not treated; the underlying cause of the murmur may or may not be treated.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets
High blood pressure is an extremely important concern in human medicine. High stress lifestyle, smoking, and high salt diet all contribute to this potentially dangerous condition and virtually everyone in the U.S. knows how serious it can be. But what about our pets? They don't smoke or worry about the mortgage and they don't deposit cholesterol in their blood vessels. They do, however, get high blood pressure, especially in age and here is what you probably should know.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common acquired heart diseases in cats but is rare in dogs.
Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats
Just like people, some pets need a pacemaker to keep their hearts ticking.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats
Sometimes the ductus arteriosus fails to close in a newborn. It remains open, or patent, usually because the muscles in the ductus failed to form properly.
Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats
The hepatic portal system consists of numerous veins, but sometimes these systems can go awry. The portal vein is the big one into the liver, where the smaller veins converge before entering the liver.
Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is high blood pressure in the arteries leading in and out of your pet's lungs. If the high blood pressure becomes too severe, it can cause disease and failure of the right side of the heart.
Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease
For pets with congestive heart failure, it is important to check the response to medication by measuring the respiratory rate at home.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram
An echocardiogram is
a type of ultrasound that looks closely at the heart as well as inside and around it
Dental & Oral
Bad Breath in Dogs and Cats
Halitosis, also called bad breath, is as an offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity. Bad breath is a common presenting pet odor complaint. Causes may be commonly be related to the mouth or rarely related to other health problems.
Cat's Teeth Examination for Cat Owners
It is easy to recognize if your cat has a broken leg, but how about a broken tooth? You would think pets would stop eating when they had oral problems. Unfortunately, this is not usually the case. By the time most owners recognize oral disease in their pets, the problem is chronic and progressive.
Cleft Palate or Lip in Puppies and Kittens
With either type, it's difficult for the affected puppy or kitten to eat properly
Clinical Signs of Oral or Dental Disease in Pets
If you see any of these clinical signs, take your pet to your veterinarian for a complete oral examination.
Dental Care and What to Expect
Root canals, dental x-rays, orthodontics, crowns, caps, implants, and periodontal surgery for pets? You must be kidding? Not at all. Dental procedures are routinely performed in veterinary practices daily. How does a loving pet owner know if dental care is needed and where can a pet owner go for advanced dental care.
Dental Care in Cats
Feline dental pathology and care are perhaps the most overlooked and under-treated areas in small animal medicine.
Gingivostomatitis in Cats
FGS is a severe oral disease that affects some cats where the body becomes allergic to plaque around the teeth.
Oral Masses/Ulcers in Dogs and Cats
Some dogs and cats develop growths in their mouths. Similar to humans, these growths may be benign or malignant. Once a mass is noticed, analysis must be made to determine the cause of the growth.
Orthodontics for Pets
Just as you would want to cure a painful skin condition or sore joint in your pet, you should also consider relieving pain in your pet's mouth. When an oral problem is caused by poorly aligned teeth, orthodontic treatment may be needed.
Periodontal Disease in Dogs and Cats
Periodontal disease is inflammation of some or all of a tooth's support. When compared to gingivitis, periodontitis indicates bone loss. If left untreated, periodontitis may cause loose painful teeth as well as internal disease. Periodontal disease is caused by plaque (bacteria).
Periodontal Disease in Pets
More than 85% of dogs and cats older than 4 years have periodontal pathology.
Plasma Cell Stomatitis in Cats
Expect an affected cat to require teeth cleaning under general anesthesia at least every 6 months. If medical management fails, all teeth need to be removed.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Retained Baby Teeth in Dogs and Cats Need Surgical Extraction
When deciduous (baby) teeth don't fall out to make way for the permanent teeth, they are called retained deciduous teeth. Retained deciduous teeth should be extracted surgically soon after they are discovered because they will cause dental problems (overcrowding in the mouth, plaque buildup, malocclusion, etc.).
Salivary Mucocele in Dogs and Cats
The most common place for a salivary mucocele is on or beneath the lower jaw or under the tongue
Stomatitis in Cats
Cats can be affected by inflammation of the entire mouth called stomatitis or lymphocytic plasmacytic syndrome (LPS).
Tooth Resorption in Cats
A common feline oral malady is the feline oral resorptive lesion (FORL).
Toothbrushing and Dental Prophylaxis in Cats and Dogs
Why should I brush my dog's or cat's teeth?
Dermatology: Skin & Nails
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Breed-Related Dermatoses in Dogs and Cats
Cat and dog breed-related skin diseases are listed.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Cuterebriasis is a Parasite Causing Skin Infections in Dogs and Cats
Treatment (removal of the larva) is one of the simplest things in veterinary medicine; your veterinarian will probe and enlarge the breathing hole, grasp the parasite with forceps, and just pull the invader out.
Demodectic Mange in Cats
Demodectic mange in dogs is extremely common, especially in puppies. Demodicosis in cats is much more unusual.
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex in Cats
Feline allergic skin disease can take some highly ulcerative forms, especially involving the upper lip. Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex is a hard condition to explain, especially since it has several forms, but we will give it a try.
Feline Acne
While the initial acne and infection can be healed, additional outbreaks may occur.
Flea and Tick Control Products for Dogs and Cats
The comparison charts - one for dogs, one for cats - allows side-by-side glimpse of available products so you can determine what is best for your pets.
Flea Control for Allergic Dogs and Cats
For some pets, fleas are just an annoyance. But when a pet is allergic to fleas or has other types of allergic skin disease, the need to control fleas is more critical.
Fleas: Know your Enemy
Fleas are not just a nuisance; they can kill, cause serious skin disease, and transmit infections and parasites.
Fur Mowing in Cats
Got a cat with a large balding spot? Wondering why the fur is falling out? Chances are excellent that the fur is not falling out at all; it is being licked off instead. Is the cat anxious? Obsessive? Maybe, but it is likely that the cat is just plain itchy. There is generally a medical approach to this problem.
Hemangioma in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiomas are a type of benign tumor of the blood vessels or skin
Hot Spots (Pyotraumatic Dermatitis) in Dogs and Cats
Hot spots are weepy, wet, red and sometimes bloody when they are fresh, and dry and scabby when they are resolving.
Hot Spots in Dogs and Cats
A hot spot is a superficial skin infection that results when the normal skin bacteria overrun the skin's defenses as a result of damage to the skin surface.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Lipomas in Dogs and Cats
Oftentimes a lump turns out to be "just a lipoma" or simply a fatty tumor and nothing to worry about.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Notoedric Mange in Cats (Feline Scabies)
Dogs get sarcoptic mange but what do cats get? It turns out they have their very own mange mite: Notoedres cati. Notoedric mange is a rarity worldwide and many veterinary dermatologists never see a single case in their entire careers.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Plasma Cell Pododermatitis (Pillow Foot) in Cats
Easy to recognize but not as easy to understand, this condition is often called pillow foot in cats for reasons that are obvious. This condition is described as rare. Most cats do not require treatment.
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
Pyoderma in Dogs and Cats
Pyoderma is caused by bacterial infection of the skin. The causative organism is almost always
Staphylococcus
. Bacteria will not usually cause disease on normal skin, but other underlying skin diseases cause some changes in the skin surface making it susceptible to infection, leading to pyoderma.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Ringworm in Dogs and Cats
Ringworm is not a worm at all but a fungal infection of the skin. It is contagious to humans, too. This FAQ provides answers.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Workups for Itchy Dogs and Cats
Itching, or pruritus, is the most common symptom of skin disease in pets. Many conditions can cause a pet to itch, including allergies, fleas, and other skin parasites.
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Digestive System
AAFCO Pet Food Labeling
Pet food labeling does not provide detailed nutritional information and it’s easily misunderstood by pet owners
Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats
There are about as many diet options for your pet as there are for you, so which one is best? Breed, age, weight, allergies, medical conditions, and finances are some of the contributing factors that need to be considered when choosing an alternative diet.
Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats
Loss of appetite is one of the most important criteria in determining if a pet is significantly ill or just having a minor malady. When the veterinarian says the pet has anorexia, it means the pet is not eating.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Cholangitis (Cholangiohepatitis) in Cats
The word cholangiohepatitis breaks down into "(bile), (vessel), hepat (liver) and (inflammation)." Putting this all together means inflammation of the liver and bile ducts. It is one of the four most common liver concerns in cats.
Cholangitis and Cholangiohepatitis in Cats
Cholangitis means inflammation of the biliary tree. Cholangiohepatitis means inflammation of the biliary tree and surrounding liver cells.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats
Colitis means inflammation of the colon and that spells diarrhea - often with fresh blood or mucus - and straining and discomfort for the pet, as well as a mess to clean up.
Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats
Difficulty in passing stool can mean extra effort (constipation) or complete impossibility (obstipation). Management can be surgical or with medication, depending on severity. Find out the difference, and find out what Megacolon is, too, on this informative page.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Gallstones in Dogs and Cats
Gallstones form because either the gallbladder isn’t functioning properly or something is wrong with the bile
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Hairballs (Trichobezoars) In Cats
If a cat is throwing up hairballs, there is more going on than most owners realize.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Hepatic Lipidosis (Fatty Liver Disease) in Cats
The liver failure cat is jaundiced, inappetent, frequently nauseated, and generally an obviously ill animal.
Hepatic Lipidosis in Cats
The primary disease that caused the problem also needs to be addressed
Infiltrative Bowel Disease in Cats
Chronic intestinal disease in cats can involve appetite loss, diarrhea, intestinal bleeding, vomiting, weight loss and debilitation. The intestinal tract does not lend itself to blood test evaluation so where do you go if intestinal disease is likely? Infiltration of the bowel by lymphocytes is a typical feature of the most common causes of chronic intestinal disease in cats.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats
Does your pet seem to have chronic vomiting or diarrhea? Those can be signs of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs
Irritable bowel syndrome is a psychosomatic disease. This means that it is the activity of the mind that causes the symptoms. Most people do not have difficulty imagining having so much anxiety that diarrhea results. Chronic anxiety can similarly result in chronic diarrhea. This is basically what irritable bowel syndrome is all about.
Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats
Pets, especially younger ones, have the unfortunate tendency to eat things they shouldn't and we aren't talking about food. Toys, socks, rocks and other materials find their way into pet stomachs but when the foreign body is a string, the consequences are especially dire.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Pancreatitis in Cats
Many people have heard of the pancreas but are not sure what it does, where it is, or what a disaster it can be when it gets inflamed.
Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats
A portosystemic shunt happens when a pet's venous blood from the intestine bypasses the liver. The pet can be born with the shunt or can get it later.
Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a rectal prolapse, you may have noticed that recently he's been spending a lot of time trying to poop
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Triaditis in Cats
Triaditis is a disease condition in cats in which they are simultaneously affected with three separate diseases: pancreatitis, cholangitis, and inflammatory bowel disease
Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens
An umbilical hernia is a condition in which abdominal contents (fat, intestines, etc.) protrude past the abdominal wall at the location where the umbilical cord was attached to the fetus.
Ears
Ear Infections (Otitis) in Dogs
Did you know the most common cause of recurrent ear infections is allergic skin disease? What do you do to keep the ear scratching and head shaking from becoming chronic?
Ear Mites in Dogs and Cats
This annoying parasite is a common source of ear infections, especially in cats and kittens. Where do they come from? How do you get rid of them?
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
Otitis Externa Treatment in Dogs and Cats
Otitis externa is an inflammation or infection of the external ear canal. Bacteria, yeast, ear mites, and allergies can all cause it. Addressing this problem involves four steps.
Total Ear Canal Ablation and Ventral Bulla Osteotomy (TECA) for End-Stage Ears in Dogs and Cats
In a TECA, all the diseased tissue including the entire ear canal, bones of the middle ear, etc., are simply removed and the healthy tissue around the ear is closed. This ends what has generally been a long tribulation of pain, odor, ear cleaning, and expensive veterinary medications and rechecks.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Endocrine: Diabetes, Thyroid, Adrenal
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease involving the body's handling of sugar. Learn about some of the basics of this common hormone problem of dogs and cats.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Dietary Therapy for Hyperthyroidism in Cats
A new commercial diet created for hyperthyroid cats is now available at your veterinarian's clinic. Where this diet fits in this picture and whether it should replace traditional therapy or be considered an acceptable last resort remain to be seen over time.
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats
Generally a high digestibility diet is the best choice for an EPI patient. These foods are low in fiber and fat and may be especially helpful for patients with trouble gaining weight. Many animals simply use enzymes mixed with their regular food.
Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
The goal in long-term management of diabetes mellitus is the alleviation of unpleasant clinical signs (constant thirst, weight loss etc.) and prevention of dangerous secondary conditions (infections, ketoacidosis, etc.). To accomplish this, blood sugar levels should be regulated between 250 mg/dl and 80 mg/dl. This is not as good as the body's natural regulation but it is a fair and achievable goal in most cases.
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats
Video and slides are provided for owners of diabetic cats who wish to learn how to conduct home tests that determine blood glucose (blood sugar) readings for their cat.
Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats
Elevated calcium starts with the bones. They receive an inappropriate message to mobilize their calcium. This message is either from excess parathyroid hormone or from high amounts of parathyroid hormone-related protein. When calcium is removed from the bones, all that is left is a fibrous scaffold, which is not really strong enough to support us. Our bones break, even fold.
Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats
Hyperlipidemia is a general term for disorders in which too many fat molecules (called lipids) circulate in the blood. The two most important lipids in pets are cholesterol and triglycerides.
Hyperthyroidism Medication for Cats (Methimazole)
The most common medication prescribed to treat feline hyperthyroidism is called methimazole (trade name Tapazole or Felimazole).
Hyperthyroidism Treatment Options in Cats
Three methods of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism are discussed.
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin is the injectable medication you use to control your diabetic cat's blood sugar. This beginner's guide will explain how to give your cat insulin injections.
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats
Monitoring is crucial to determining your pet's proper insulin dose. Much monitoring can be done at home; however, some tests simply must be done at the veterinarian's office.
Signs, Symptoms, and Diagnosis of Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Do you have an older cat who is losing weight despite having an excellent appetite? That is the hallmark sign of hyperthyroidism in cats.
Surgical Treatment for Feline Hyperthyroidism
Considering that the average hyperthyroid cat is a geriatric patient with special potential for high blood pressure and heart disease, quite a bit of patient preparation is necessary to reduce anesthetic risk.
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Thyroid Treatment Using Radiotherapy for Cats
This method of therapy is generally considered the safest and most effective method of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism.
Eyes
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Cataracts in Dogs and Cats
Cataracts are an important cause of blindness in the dog. Through special surgery, it may be possible to restore vision. Would you recognize a cataract if you saw one in your cat or dog?
Causes of Blindness in Dogs and Cats
Abnormalities in eye structures may lead to blindness
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Corneal Ulcers and Erosions in Dogs and Cats
A scratch or scrape on the eye is extremely painful, causing squinting, redness and excess tears.  What do you need to know about taking care of a pet with this condition? Read about the diagnosis and treatment of corneal ulcers and erosions.
Dry Eye (Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca) in Dogs and Cats
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or KCS, is a fancy way of saying the eye is dry. There are many causes of dry eye, but the most common one appears to be immune mediated destruction of the tear-producing gland tissue.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Eye Removal (Enucleation) in Pets
Enucleation means removal of the eye. What are the common reasons this procedure may be necessary, what can you expect after surgery, and what complications are possible?
Glaucoma in Dogs and Cats
Glaucoma is an eye disease that can cause significant pain and lead to blindness.
Haws Syndrome in Cats
Haws syndrome is an elevation of the third eyelid in both eyes.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Iris Coloboma in Dogs and Cats
The iris coloboma, which is relatively uncommon, does not affect vision, nor does it progress to anything else.
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) in Dogs
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) describes a group of inherited degenerative disorders of the retina that occur commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. Dogs eventually become blind, but remain happy and otherwise healthy.
Uveitis in Dogs and Cats
Uveitis is an inflammation of the dark tissues (uvea) of the eye
First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
A localized accumulation of pus, usually caused by an infection introduced from an animal bite or other penetrating wound.
Bandaging: First Aid
We use bandages for several reasons: to protect wounds from the environment, protect the environment from wounds, and to discourage the pet from licking or irritating a wound.
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Any insect sting or spider bite can cause problems for your pet.
Bleeding: First Aid
Learn how to stop bleeding in an emergency.
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
CPCR (formerly referred to as CPR) is the treatment required to save an animal or human life when suffering cardiopulmonary arrest.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Choking: First Aid
Choking is interference with breathing caused by foreign material in, or compression on, the trachea (windpipe).
Dehydration: First Aid
Excess loss of water from the body or inappropriate intake of water into the body.
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Suffocation caused by the filling of the lungs with water or other fluid. What to do?
Electrical Burns: First Aid
It is imperative that you do not touch the pet until the electrical source has been turned off or moved. Electricity can flow through your pet and affect you as well.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fainting and dizziness may be associated with anything from low blood sugar to severe heart disease.
Fever: First Aid
Fever is the elevation of body temperature in response to infection or inflammation.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
The elevation of body temperature above normal. It is sometimes indicative of a fever, but it can also be associated with severe conditions such as heat stroke or heat prostration.
Hypothermia: First Aid
When a pet's body temperature dips below 100.5 degrees, the pet is too cold and must be warmed.
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Dogs frequently carry sticks in their mouths and suffer impalements when an end of the stick jams into the ground.
Introduction: First Aid
VeterinaryPartner.com has provided this complete reference book online for you to browse through, expanding your knowledge of Dog & Cat First Aid.
Nosebleed: First Aid
If the nose is bleeding profusely and/or the bleeding lasts more than 5 minutes, seek veterinary attention.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
To identify an illness or abnormal situation, you must first be able to recognize what is normal for your pet.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
What can you do to prevent a crisis?
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Shock: First Aid
The term shock can mean different things to different people, and medical professionals still debate the true meaning of the word. Regardless of cause, shock is life-threatening and requires immediate attention and treatment.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Sunburn: First Aid
Damage to the tissues caused by exposure to the sun's rays.
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
The first aid provider must not only identify and treat injury or illness, but must also safely transport the patient to the veterinary facility for treatment.
Wound Care for Pets
Wounds bigger than a small cut are almost always worse than they look
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Wrapping Up First Aid
If you have questions, seek advice from a veterinarian.
Infections: Bacteria, Fungi, Viruses, Parasites
Abscesses from Bite Wounds
At most clinics, a week doesn't go by without seeing a cat or two in this condition. Cats fight, bite, and get infected. What do you need to know?
Anaplasmosis
Anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease. Two forms of anaplasmosis are known: granulocytic anaplasmosis and infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia.A dog can have both infections at the same time
Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne
Signs can include poor appetite and fever. Joints are commonly affected,
Antibiotic Use in Pets
Antibiotics are useless against viruses and will not cure viral infections. Previously, people and pets with viruses were given preventive antibiotics to prevent secondary infections, but this approach is not favored anymore because of the bacteria's ability to develop antibiotic resistance.
Aspergillosis in Cats
Aspergillosis infections in cats are rare and most commonly seen in cats with a poor immune system
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Bartonella and Cat Scratch Fever
Most people know very little about this infection other than it involves a fever spread by cat scratches. In fact, it involves infection by a bacterium called Bartonella henselae, which is spread by fleas.
Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats
Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that affects dogs and cats. Blastomycosis appears in only certain geographic areas in North America, most often the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence River valleys. Infection with Blastomyces occurs when a cat or dog inhales the fungal spores into the lungs.
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Cats and Ferrets Had SARS in Laboratory Setting
The big SARS outbreak ended in 2003, but several smaller outbreaks were reported in 2004, and public health officials expected further outbreaks in the future. However, as of November, 2017, the WHO and the CDC both indicate that there have not been any more cases of SARS reported anywhere in the world.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Clostridium difficile Becoming more Common in North America
It is unclear if C. difficile can be transmitted from pets to people. The types of C. difficile found in pets are often the same as those found in people, including the epidemic strain ribotype 027/NAP1. So it makes sense that C. difficile could potentially be transmitted between people and animals, but there is still no conclusive proof.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
COVID-19 in a Tiger
Don’t over-react
Cryptosporidium is a Particularly Challenging Type of Coccidia for Pets
Cryptosporidium are similar to Coccidia and, until recent advances in molecular biology showed us otherwise, they were believed to be simply another species of Coccidia. They have some particularly unpleasant features.
Cytauxzoonosis in Cats
Cytauxzoon felis is spread by tick bites. This condition has a very high mortality rate.
Distemper (Panleukopenia) in Cats
Feline distemper, caused by a parvovirus, is a life-threatening disease. The virus is considered ubiquitous, meaning it is in virtually every place that is not regularly disinfected. The infection is highly contagious among unvaccinated cats, usually kittens and young adult cats living in groups. Barn cats, feral colonies, animal shelter groups, pet stores, and rescue facilities are high risk for outbreaks.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a deadly infection in cats that is caused by the FIP virus. The disease occurs most commonly in young cats, although it can infect older cats too.
Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV)
Feline leukemia virus, a retrovirus, is a common infection of cats. It is the cause of more cat deaths, directly or indirectly, than any other organism and is widespread in the cat population.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Flea Control for Dogs and Cats
Fleas are the most common external parasite of companion animals. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most common skin disease of dogs and cats! In order to help select the most appropriate products to achieve a flea-free existence for an allergic pet, learn about the life cycle of the flea.
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats
Histoplasmosis is a dangerous disease caused by fungus
Hookworms in Cats and Dogs
The adult hookworm lives in the small intestine of its host. It hangs on to the intestinal wall using its six sharp teeth and unlike other worms that just absorb the digested food through their skin as it passes by, the hookworm drinks its host's blood. Humans can get hookworms too.
How Toxoplasmosis Affects Your Cat
You have probably heard the warnings given to pregnant women about the parasite toxoplasmosis, advising against cleaning litterboxes and the dangers of ingesting raw/undercooked meat or milk products. But should you be concerned about how this parasite affects your cat?
Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
In hydrometra and mucometra, the fluid is sterile and there is no infection. Only pyometra is an infection
Infectious Anemia in Cats
The infected cat's immune system is busy coating infected red blood cells with antibodies. Coated red blood cells are removed from the circulation by the spleen. This kills the organism, and the iron is harvested and recycled into new red blood cells. The problem is that so many red blood cells are being destroyed that the cat becomes anemic.
Lice in Dogs and Cats
When lice are found, it is usually in the dogs that are living in or were obtained from filthy, crowded conditions.
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats
MRSA is the abbreviation for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats
In dogs and cats, the most common conditions associated with MRSA tend to be skin infections, post-operative incisional infections and wound infections. The bacteria have also been isolated from the urinary tract, auditory canal, skin, eye and joints.
Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats
Physaloptera
are rare but most common in the Midwestern U.S., particularly in pets with access to the outdoors
Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pyothorax is one of those conditions where prognosis is reasonably good (assuming the patient is not too far gone at the time of presentation) as long as aggressive treatment is pursued. If one tries to go with inexpensive alternatives to proper treatment, a poor outcome is likely.
Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses
Pythiosis occurs in dogs and horses more often than in cats.
Rabies in Animals
Descriptions of rabies go back thousands of years as rabies has classically been one of the most feared infections of all time. Rabies is a serious disease, but fortunately it can also be easily prevented in dogs and cats by proper vaccination.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Roundworms In Cats And Kittens
This common parasite can cause diarrhea and vomiting in cats and dogs, and some pet owners become very concerned when their pet expels a worm up to seven inches in length. Roundworms are also one of the few dog or cat parasites that can be dangerous when transmitted to humans.
Taenia Species Tapeworms in Dogs and Cats
We have generated some confusion regarding tapeworms not contracted from fleas. There actually is another tapeworm besides the common tapeworm whose segments might be seen on a pet's anal area or on their feces.
Tapeworms (Dipylidium caninum) in Dogs and Cats
Noticing something like grains of rice that move, something that looks like sesame seeds in your pet's bedding? Where do tapeworms come from, how can you eliminate them, and why do they come back?
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Tritrichomonas Infection Causes Diarrhea in Cats
Kittens and cats living in groups have an assortment of infectious diseases to contend with.
Tritrichomonas blagburni
is yet another infectious organism yielding diarrhea in cats.
Tritrichomoniasis in Cats
Begin Typing Here!
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
When You Need Antibiotics for Your Pets, and When You Don’t
Antibiotics can be literal life savers for your pet when prescribed and used for the kind of infection that responds to the medication. But when given for something where they are not appropriate — such as a virus — antibiotics can create a long-lasting problem of antibiotic resistance.
Whipworm Infection in Dogs and Cats
The whipworm of dogs is substantially smaller than the other worms (a mere 30-50 mm in length, about a half inch maximum). The "head" (or more accurately the digestive end of the worm) is skinny vs. its stout tail (or reproductive end) which gives the worm a whip shape, hence the name.
Nervous System: Brain, Nerves & Spinal Cord
Ataxia in Dogs and Cats
Ataxia is a symptom caused by some type of central nervous system problem in which the brain cannot correctly tell the body what to do. It is an inability to make normal, coordinated, voluntary movements.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cerebellar Hypoplasia Cats Are Clumsy from Birth
A cat with this disease clearly has balance issues: he walks with his legs widely placed for fear of falling, and places his feet clumsily. He often leans against walls for support. Sitting still, he may look like a fairly normal cat but once focused, tremors begin getting more wobbly as concentration becomes more intense. Despite the obvious impairment, cats with this condition are happy, able to feed themselves and use a litter box, and are felt to have good life quality.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Cognitive Dysfunction Syndrome in Dogs
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS) is essentially the dog equivalent of Alzheimer's disease
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Horner's Syndrome in Cats and Dogs
Slight squint, small pupil, raised third eyelid... it all looks pretty strange, as if something is wrong with the eye. In fact, it is not the eye itself that is the problem, but rather it is a nerve problem. Read more about this symptom and its causes.
Hydrocephalus (Water on the Brain) in Dogs and Cats
This condition literally means "water head" and is more commonly referred to as water on the brain. The central nervous system is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid that is secreted by chambers inside the brain. When fluid builds up, there is no room in the brain for extra volume and disaster can result. This condition is particularly common in dome-headed puppies.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Hyperesthesia syndrome is felt to be a type of compulsive disorder, usually initiated when the cat is in conflict. The cat wants to perform one behavior but is prevented from doing so and ultimately in frustration performs another behavior. After a while, this second behavior, which frequently is grooming, is performed compulsively.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Feline Hyperesthesia syndrome (FHS) means “too much feeling”, hyperesthesia is the opposite of anesthesia which means a lack of feeling or no sensation at all.
Manx Syndrome in Cats
Manx syndrome (sacrocaudal dysgenesis, sacrocaudal agenesis) is an array of problems involving the function of the hind legs, urinary bladder, and colon of a tailless cat. In affected cats, the spine and spinal cord are shortened because the last few vertebrae and spinal segments have not developed normally
Myasthenia Gravis in Dogs and Cats
Myasthenia gravis is a disease that interrupts the way nerves communicate with muscles. There is no treatment for the congenital form. The acquired form, which is an autoimmune disease, is treated medically with immunosuppressive agents.
Neuropathic Pain in Dogs and Cats
People who experience neuropathic pain describe it as "a pins and needles sensation," tingling, burning, itching, numbness or cold, and sometimes feeling as if they had received a small electric shock. Grades of neuropathic pain that have been established in human medicine are definite, probable and possible. Pets cannot describe their pain to us but we believe it's likely to be like what people have.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Seizure Disorders in Cats
Seizures are sudden fits of uncontrollable movement and can include twitching, shaking, and/or muscle spasms
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Serotonin Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Serotonin syndrome is a serious drug reaction to medications that build up high levels of serotonin in the body. Serotonin syndrome can be a life-threatening situation, therefore if you think your pet is developing it, visit a veterinarian immediately.
Spina Bifida in Dogs and Cats
The spinal cord is surrounded and protected by a bony tube made up of
a series of bones called vertebrae, linked together by intervertebral discs, ligaments, and muscles. This entire complex is referred to as the "spine.” Sometimes, abnormal growth and development of the spine happen before birth with both puppies and kittens, resulting in a spinal defect called Spina Bifida.
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Traumatic Brain Injury in Dogs and Cats
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) occurs when a sudden event, such as a blow or fall, happens to the head. In both humans and animals, a head injury severe enough to damage the brain is referred to as traumatic brain injury or TBI.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Nose & Sinuses
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Nasal Pharyngeal Polyps in Cats
Naso-pharyngeal polyps are the most common masses that are seen in the external ear canal in cats. They are benign growths.
Rhinitis in Dogs and Cats
Rhinitis is the inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose. It can occur by itself or as part of an upper respiratory illness/infection.
Nutrition-related
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not anyone's friend. The failing kidney is no longer good at getting rid of excess phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the blood begin to rise.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs
Calcium is such a crucial component of our biochemistry that virtually any complete blood panel, whether human or veterinary, will include a measurement of calcium. Our bodies go to tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within a narrow range. We need a storage source to draw upon for when we need more circulating calcium as well as a system to unload excess.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Weight Loss for Obese Cats
Obesity is a preventable and treatable disease
Orthopedic: Bones, Joints & Muscles
Amputation is Preferable to Continued Pain
A letter from a veterinarian points out that amputation is far better than continued pain or euthanasia.
Arthritis in Dogs and Cats: What Can be Done?
Arthritis, also known as osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease, is a degenerative, progressive, and irreversible condition of the joints.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Diskospondylitis (Intervertebral Disk Infection) in Dogs and Cats
Diskospondylitis is a bacterial/fungal infection that can reach the intervertebral disks several ways.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Fractures in Dogs and Cats
If this article has caught your attention, it may be that your pet has had the misfortune of suffering a fractured bone. This is a traumatic experience for both you and your pet and there are a few things you should know to help both of you make the best of a bad situation!
Hemivertebrae are Congenitally Deformed Vertebra in Dogs and Cats
A hemivertebra is a congenitally deformed vertebra. Hemivertebrae of the tail are not a problem as there is no spinal cord tissue that far down.
Hip Dislocation in Dogs and Cats
Hip dislocation is the common term for the separation of the femoral head from the pelvic acetabulum. In order for the hip to dislocate, trauma must be severe enough to break the capital ligament.
Medications for Degenerative Arthritis in Dogs and Cats
Arthritis pain causes discomfort and loss of mobility in aged pets, and there are numerous remedies on the market. Which ones can be combined? Which are proven reliable and which may only work in some individuals?
Normal Joints Look Like This in Dogs and Cats
A pet does not have to be a senior citizen to require joint care supplements or physical therapy. Degenerative arthritis can result from an injury or can be the result of genetics and joint conformation.
Solensia™ (Frunevetmab Injection):  An Arthritis Medication Just for Cats
Solensia™ is an injectable medication specifically designed to treat cats for discomfort from arthritis.
Spondylosis Deformans in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, spondylosis deformans occurs most often along lower back (lumbar) vertebrae. In cats, it tends to occur more often in the chest (thoracic) vertebrae.
Tail Pull Injuries in Cats
Cats get their tails pulled or broken through an assortment of traumas. One might think a tail break would involve an obvious external wound but usually this is not the case; instead, nerve damage (from stretching of the cauda equina nerves) is the usual tip-off.
Reproductive System
Cryptorchidism (Retained Testicles) in Dogs and Cats
Cryptorchidism is a condition in which a male’s testicles have not descended (dropped) into the scrotum. Some cryptorchid animals are sterile and some are not.
Ovarian Remnant Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
The spayed female pet has no ovaries and should not display any signs of a heat cycle but what happens if she does anyway? Where might these hormones be coming from?
Paraphimosis and Phimosis in Dogs and Cats
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the penis, but it is not an erection. It is quite painful and thus medically urgent. Priapism is the inability to extend the penis beyond the sheath. Phimosis is rare, and is either congenital or acquired. Paraphimosis and phimosis are flip sides of the same coin, although they are not the same thing, nor are they treated the same way.
Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
Pyometra is the life-threatening infection of the uterus that generally occurs in middle-aged to older female dogs in the 6 weeks following heat. A uterus with pyometra swells dramatically and is filled with pus, bacteria, dying tissue, and toxins. Without treatment, the pet is expected to die.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Respiratory System: Lungs & Airways
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats
Most people have heard the term pneumonia and know it is a lung infection of some sort. In fact, pneumonia is not a very specific term and essentially means "lung inflammation of some sort." Pneumonia is an inflammation in deep lung tissues where oxygen is absorbed into the body and waste gases are removed. It has potential to be life-threatening regardless of its cause.
Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pneumothorax may result from chest trauma, excessive pressure on the lungs, or underlying lung disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, etc.). In some cases, the cause is never discovered.
Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonic stenosis is the third most common congenital heart disease in dogs. It can be accompanied by additional heart defects to create a constellation of disaster or it can be mild enough to be no more than a surprising incidental finding.
Urinary System: Bladder & Kidneys
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats
Most calcium oxalate stones develop in cats between ages 5 and 14 years. 35% of cats with calcium oxalate bladder stones have elevated blood calcium (hypercalcemia). Burmese and Himalayan cats appear genetically predisposed to the development of calcium oxalate bladder stones.
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats
While struvite bladder stones can sometimes be found incidentally while looking into another problem, most of the time they are found when the cat is showing signs of lower urinary tract disease.
Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats
Usually a surgery called cystotomy is necessary to remove bladder stones.
Blocked Cats are an Emergency
In advanced cases, where the urine flow has been stopped for more than 24 hours, cats can become systemically ill from retained toxins and start vomiting, or become very weak and lethargic. Death usually happens within 48 hours, and it's not a pleasant way to go.
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin
Chronic kidney, or renal, failure is common among geriatric pets. As treatment frequently is long term, owners should understand their options. Topics discussed include definitions, medications used in treatment, diagnostics/helpful testing, and monitoring.
Ectopic Ureters in Dogs
If your puppy has an ectopic ureter or even two, the only chance at resolving the incontinence is through surgery. This is expensive and often unsuccessful so it is important to know what you are getting into.
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
In glomerular disease, holes are punched out in the filtration system, allowing molecules that the body needs to keep entering the urine flow and be urinated away. Chronic inflammation leads to the holes in the filtration system.
Idiopathic Cystitis in Cats
Formerly known as FUS or FLUTD, feline idiopathic cystitis simply means bladder inflammation of unknown cause. It is a set of symptoms that cannot be classified as a disease.
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet?
Most every animal hospital can provide diuresis: a therapy where extra fluid beyond what the patient can drink is provided, thus giving the kidney its medium so that it can remove toxic waste. This works well but there comes a time when even with plenty of fluids, the sick kidney simply cannot get the toxins out. For most patients this is the end of the line. In fact, dialysis may be another choice, though it is substantially more expensive than diuresis and dialysis centers for pets are still few and far between.
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
To the uninitiated, the impression may be that once your cat or dog receives a new kidney, life is renewed and all the kidney problems are solved. In fact, this is hardly the case. Immune-suppressive medications are needed to prevent rejection of the new organ, not to mention infection and other issues. A kidney transplant is a big deal regardless of the species of the recipient.
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats
Lithotripsy is a funny word for a minimally invasive alternative to urinary stone removal surgery.
Lower Urinary Tract Disease in Cats (also known as FLUTD)
Just about any inflammatory condition in the feline lower urinary tract creates the same collection of signs. Tumor, infection, bladder stone etc. all create the same clinical picture.
Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats
With polyuria (PU) the body makes more urine than normal, which in turn causes a condition called polydipsia (PD), which means your dog or cat is extra thirsty because they are trying to stay hydrated. What are the reasons for these conditions?
Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats
Pyelonephritis is an inflammation of the kidney that frequently shows no symptoms and thus it is not usually recognized until the signs become severe. It may not be diagnosed until histopathology is done on the kidney after the pet's death.
Sterile Cystitis (Pandora Syndrome) in Cats
Also known as Feline Interstitial Cystitis, Feline Idiopathic Cystitis, FIC. Cystitis may result from a bacterial infection or bladder stones. Dogs rarely get sterile cystitis, while it’s quite common among young to middle-aged cats.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Urinary Blockage in Cats
Every owner of a male cat should be familiar with this emergency condition. The recognition of straining to urinate is the key. Urine flow must be re-established by trained veterinary personnel to prevent death.
Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats
The urinary tract infection (UTI) is one of the most common ailments in small animal practices.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Care and Husbandry
Breeding & Baby Animal Care
Caring for Orphaned Kittens
Although nothing can replace the care from a feline mama, there are steps you can take to become an excellent foster parent until the kittens are ready to face the world.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Feline Pregnancy and Kitten Birth
Too often a litter of kittens comes as an almost total surprise.  One day you notice that the cute little girl kitten from last fall is a bit round in the middle only the very next spring. No one got around to spaying her and she seemed too young for - er - adult entertainment. What happens when cats give birth?
How to Find a Good, Responsible Breeder
A responsible breeder is one who cares about their animals-and you as their potential family-more than their own profit. Here are some ideas on how to find a good one.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Orphan Puppy & Kitten Care
Spring is kitten season. If you have some unexpected additions to your family and are not sure what to do, orphan care is not that hard when you know what to do.
Pregnancy Termination in Dogs and Cats
Unwanted pet pregnancy happens and some choices have to be made. Let's review your options: Have the babies, spay during pregnancy, or medical abortion.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Spaying your Female Cat
Spaying your pet cat is also very important, not only to keep down pet overpopulation, but for your personal mental health, as well! It is also good for the cat... Here is a list of Frequently Asked Questions about this procedure.
Diet & Nutrition
Behavior Supplements in Dogs and Cats
Many colleagues and pet owners ask about the use of supplements in the treatment of behavioral issues. There is limited documented evidence on the use of these supplements, but to address this demand for information, here is what we know is being used and impressions from what experience and data are available.
Canned Food Transition for Cats Addicted to Dry Food
There are few things in life more frustrating than dealing with a finicky cat. Cats can be incredibly 'set in their ways' when it comes to their dietary preferences. Cats, like children, often resist what is best for them. The transition process often involves much more than just plunking down a new food item. Time, patience, and tricks are often required.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Nutrition for Your Cat
Cats' overall health can be significantly improved with a high-protein canned food diet to help maintain good hydration.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Omega Three Fatty Acids for our Pets
Cold water fish oils are an excellent source of DHA and EPA for pets.
People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets
While it is okay to share an occasional tidbit with your pet, learn which ones should not be shared at all.
Environment
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Treating your Yard for Fleas and Ticks
To treat fleas and ticks, the yard must be treated as well as your pets and home
Winter Holiday Hazards for Pets
Here are some tips for keeping your pets out of danger during the holiday season.
General Care: Vaccines & More
Declawing and Alternatives for Cats
Here is some factual information about declawing, as well as some nonsurgical alternatives.
De-Skunking Your Dog or Cat
Getting sprayed by a skunk happens to curious dogs who stick their noses into places that annoy skunks. It happens to cats, too, just not nearly as often. Unless your pet has been skunked, you may not realize that the odor stuck to your pet is not the same minor one that you smell driving down a road where a skunk has released its scent. The up close and personal smell won’t just make you wrinkle your nose and gag a bit; it’s a bit like the acrid smell of burning rubber or chemical fire that grasps your lungs and hurts your eyes.
Giving Oral Medications to Dogs and Cats
Sadly, some estimates of veterinary compliance are as low as 20% to 30%, which means many pets aren't healing as well as they could be, and money is being spent for little value.
Microchipping Could Save your Pet's Life
A microchip can reunite you with a lost pet, serve as proof of ownership in a dispute, or even mean the difference between euthanasia and medical care in an emergency. A chip can be implanted in a matter of seconds while you wait.
Nail Trims for Adult Cats
Nail Trims in Kittens
Neutering your Male Cat
This is probably the simplest surgical procedure your veterinarian will do. Click here to find out what exactly is done, how it helps, and what to expect about recovery.
Pet Treats...What to Look Out For
Salmonella-contaminated pig ear treats are historically the main offender, but any animal-based treat that is not processed to kill pathogens (e.g. cooking, pasteurization, irradiation) is a concern.
Pilling a Cat
Many cats know you are waiting to see the licking motions and will try to fool you. If the pill is still in the mouth when you check, just reach a finger in and tip the pill further back on the tongue or allow the cat to spit the pill out and begin again.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Senior Cats' Health Issues
A cat's health changes with age. Physical and mental changes occur, just as they do with people. Most older cats sleep more than they did when young, and they usually sleep more deeply. They may not be able to jump quite as high. They may lose or gain weight, depending on their metabolism.
Sunscreen for Pets
Sunscreen can and should be used on cats and dogs. Animals that have light-colored noses and thin, very short, or missing fur are most in need of protective sunscreen.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Traveling with Pets
Vaccine Information for Dogs, Cats, Puppies and Kittens
Vaccination is an important part of a pet's health and it should not be skipped over. If cost is a problem there are several approaches one may take but each has advantages and disadvantages.
Vaccine Titers for Pets
Use of vaccine titers is increasing as they become more affordable and easier to measure
What First Time Cat Owners Should Know
Each cat has their own preferences and it's a learning process for you to find out what they are
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Toxicities
Household & Environmental Substances
Common Household Items Can Poison Pets
Thousands of cats and dogs needlessly suffer and many die each year by accidental ingestion of household poisons.
Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of Antifreeze and Your Pets
Would you know what to do if your pet got into antifreeze?
Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause Obstructions in Pets
Unfortunately, if a pet swallows glue with MDI in it, such as Gorilla Glue, the warm and moist environment of the stomach causes the glue to foam and expand into a large mass that must be removed surgically.
Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
The most common cause of lead poisoning in pets is ingestion of lead-based paint. Although lead-based paint is no longer available in the United States, it was used in buildings for many years.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats
The traditional anticoagulant rodenticides had an antidote in case of accidental poisoning, but there is no antidote to bromethalin, and bromethalin products are tasty to dogs and cats.
Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats
There are several types of rodenticides available. The traditional products are called anticoagulant rodenticides and are discussed here. If one intends to use a rodenticide we encourage you to choose this type over others as there is a readily available antidote for the anti-coagulant rodenticides. Other rodenticides are more toxic and no antidote is available.
Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets
Which common cleaning and disinfecting products can be problematic in our pets?
Human Foods, & Recreational Substances
Cannabis Toxicity in Pets
Cannabis generally refers to the products of the Cannabis sativa plant, commonly known as marijuana and has been safely used medically for centuries.
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Nicotine Poisoning in Pets
Everyone knows the Surgeon General's warning about cigarette smoking but what about cigarette eating? Nicotine poisoning is a real concern anywhere that a pet may find cigarettes, nicotine gums, nicotine patches, e-cigarette filter cartridges, e-liquid, or e-juice. Dogs, particularly puppies, tend to chew things up first and ask questions later.
Yeast Dough Dangers in Pets
The buildup of gas and rising dough in the stomach is painful and can lead to bloat
Medications & Supplements
Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
Ibuprofen is felt to be too toxic for safe use in pets at any dose but if a pet is lucky, exposure will not have reached the toxic dose but it may not take much given that the typical non-prescription pill contains 200 mg.
Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Now that pennies are made of zinc instead of copper, swallowing them can be harmful to your pet. Many veterinarians are unaware of this syndrome and do not realize that pennies are far more than a simple foreign body. This is a recently described disease and many questions are still unanswered.
Poisonous Plants & Venomous Animals
Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
If you did not witness your pet eating a mushroom, you will likely notice when they start feeling sick
Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats
17 plants that are poisonous to dogs or cats from the ASPCA Poison Control Center.
Safe and Toxic Garden Plant Images
This is a collection of images linked to from the Safe Gardening page.
Safe Gardening for Dogs and Cats
The garden shops and catalogs are full of gorgeous garden shrubs and flowers. They tell us how to water and how much sunshine is needed, but rarely do they tell us if the plant is pet safe.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Toxic and Non-toxic Plants
This list contains plants that have not been reported as having systemic effects on the animals or as having intense effects on the gastrointestinal tract.
Behavior
Aggression, Anxiety & Fear
Car Ride Anxiety in Dogs and Cats
Many love to take their dog on errands and fun adventures in the car. Some even take their cats. Some dogs and cats become anxious in the car with others refusing to enter the car at all. What can we do
Fear of Noises in Dogs and Cats
Often, combinations of treatment methods are needed
Fear-related Aggression in Cats
Just like us, cats feel fear, and their behavior changes in response to it. What makes one cat fearful or anxious may not make another one feel that way.
Feline Play and Play Aggression
Cats are social animals and enjoy interactions with the humans in their lives.
Halloween is a Scary Night for Pets
While Halloween isn't as noisy or frightening as the Fourth of July. for pets it's likely in second place as Scariest Holiday of the Year. Keeping your pets away from the frenetic parts of the celebration is in both your best interests.
Human Directed Aggression in Cats
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
PTSD Can Occur in Companion Animals after Disasters
Dogs and cats who survive disasters can suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder in the same way as their owners and for the same reasons.
Puppies and Kittens Who Bite
Biting and mouthing may be normal for puppies and kittens, but continuing to bite into adulthood can lead to issues.
Territorial Marking in Cats
Territorial marking, also known as urine marking or spraying in cats, is the act of purposefully urinating in an area as a way of communicating.
Using Medication to Lower Veterinary Visit Stress in Dogs and Cats
They anticipate something bad happening, so the anxiety starts sooner and sooner.
Enrichment & Exercise
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Mealtime Enrichment for Cats
Food enrichment provides physical and behavioral wellbeing for the cat and enjoyment for the family.
General
Cat Body Language
One of the best things you can do to strengthen your relationship with your cat is to understand their body launguage. By understanding their language, we can improve our relationship with them and interpret relationships between cats within our home.
Body Language of Cats
Often a cat's body language can be used to display multiple emotions. Thus, when trying to figure out your cat is saying, try to understand the context in which he is communicating.
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
Feline House-soiling
Once medical conditions are ruled out, house-soiling can be broken down into two main categories: Inappropriate elimination (toileting) or marking (spraying)
Inappropriate Elimination
House-training problems - called inappropriate elimination - are the number one cause of behavior-related complaints from cat lovers - and with good reason.
Inappropriate Elimination (House-Soiling) in Cats
Does your cat seem to forget where the real litter box is and instead use an imaginary litter box in the middle of the living room rug? This could be caused by medical or behavioral problems.
Understanding your Cat’s Body Language
Introducing New Experiences
Getting your Cat into a Carrier
If you get upset or angry, your cat will likely get upset too. Remain calm.
How to Make Veterinary Visits Less Stressful
How to Prepare Your Cat for a Low Stress Handling® Blood Draw Visit
Veterinary visits can be stressful for everyone. Low-Stress Handling® Principles of Handling provide an opportunity for you to help your veterinarian to perform a safer and more thorough physical exam.
Introducing the New Baby to Your Cat
Some cats interact really well with new babies and will continue their lives as if nothing has changed. For many cats, however, changes associated with a new baby in the house can be a difficult adjustment and may result in stress or anxiety.
Training Your Cat to Use the Carrier
Cats learn by association, so the sudden appearance of the carrier tends to signal that something scary is happening. Training cats to love their carriers is beneficial for many reasons. The key is to build and maintain a positive association with the carrier to make your cat’s visit to the veterinarian as low stress as possible.
Training
Desensitization and Counterconditioning to Nail Trimmers for Cats
Importance of Socializing Puppies and Kittens
Socialization is getting puppies and kittens used to people, other animals, and experiences that they will encounter frequently in their adult lives.
Traveling with Your Cat
At some point, you and your cat will need to travel. You may feel stressed by the idea, but with a bit of effort and planning, cats can learn to cope with the trip. Preparing your cat beforehand can make the experience less stressful for both of you.
What Is Cooperative Care in Veterinary Medicine?
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats
We get hay fever; dogs get itchy skin. This condition is usually seasonal - but not always - and many treatments are available. Find out the causes and what you can do to relieve your pet's discomfort.
We get hay fever; dogs get itchy skin. This condition is usually seasonal - but not always - and many treatments are available. Find out the causes and what you can do to relieve your pet's discomfort.
Asthma in Cats
If your cat needs to open its mouth to breathe or if its abdomen moves excessively as it breathes (and it is not purring), then it may be suffering from feline asthma. Asthma is a recurring respiratory compromise that occurs when the lung airways constrict either spontaneously or in response to stimuli that normally should not cause a reaction.
If your cat needs to open its mouth to breathe or if its abdomen moves excessively as it breathes (and it is not purring), then it may be suffering from feline asthma. Asthma is a recurring respiratory compromise that occurs when the lung airways constrict either spontaneously or in response to stimuli that normally should not cause a reaction.
Atopic Dermatitis in Cats
You or someone you know may have allergies, but did you know your cat can too?
Many conditions besides allergies can cause your cat to be
itchy.
You or someone you know may have allergies, but did you know your cat can too?
Many conditions besides allergies can cause your cat to be
itchy.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats
Dust mites feed off of skin scales and dander shed by humans and animals. Mites love bedding, carpeting, and anywhere they can find a hiding place with the likelihood of skin dander being present. Dust mites also require a relatively high humidity in the home to truly thrive.
Dust mites feed off of skin scales and dander shed by humans and animals. Mites love bedding, carpeting, and anywhere they can find a hiding place with the likelihood of skin dander being present. Dust mites also require a relatively high humidity in the home to truly thrive.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT)
Platelets can be mistaken by the immune system as invaders. When this happens, antibodies coat the platelets and the spleen's phagocytes remove them in numbers up to 10 times greater than the normal platelet removal rate.
Platelets can be mistaken by the immune system as invaders. When this happens, antibodies coat the platelets and the spleen's phagocytes remove them in numbers up to 10 times greater than the normal platelet removal rate.
Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses
Most people know someone who gets periodic "allergy shots" for airborne allergies. What this means is that an individually-made serum is created using small amounts of allergens (proteins against which the person reacts). It works for dogs and cats, too.
Most people know someone who gets periodic "allergy shots" for airborne allergies. What this means is that an individually-made serum is created using small amounts of allergens (proteins against which the person reacts). It works for dogs and cats, too.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats
There has never been a class of drug that has more application in disease treatment than the glucocorticoid class. Indeed, this group is rivaled only by antibiotics in lives saved. But side effects from the glucocorticoid group are numerous and can be classified into those seen with short-term use and those seen in long-term use.
There has never been a class of drug that has more application in disease treatment than the glucocorticoid class. Indeed, this group is rivaled only by antibiotics in lives saved. But side effects from the glucocorticoid group are numerous and can be classified into those seen with short-term use and those seen in long-term use.
Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats
Immunization represents stimulation of the immune system, an inherently inflammatory process. Vaccination reactions severe enough to produce shock are
extremely
rare and are a function of an individual pet's immune response.
Immunization represents stimulation of the immune system, an inherently inflammatory process. Vaccination reactions severe enough to produce shock are
extremely
rare and are a function of an individual pet's immune response.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) in Dogs and Cats
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an extreme complication of numerous already life-threatening conditions leading to the deregulation of the body's natural mechanisms of blood clotting and blood clot dissolving.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an extreme complication of numerous already life-threatening conditions leading to the deregulation of the body's natural mechanisms of blood clotting and blood clot dissolving.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
We depend on red blood cells to bring oxygen to our tissues and carry waste gases away. Without enough red blood cells we die. We can lose blood cells from bleeding, but sometimes our immune system gets confused and destroys them by mistake. What can we do when this happens?
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Cats
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, or NI, is a rare immune-mediated disease that is caused when newborn kittens with type A blood drink colostrum from a mother with type B blood.
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, or NI, is a rare immune-mediated disease that is caused when newborn kittens with type A blood drink colostrum from a mother with type B blood.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats
There are three important ways in which the kidney patient loses red blood cells. The first way is bone marrow suppression. The second way is bleeding. The third way is called hemodilution. Maintaining a stable red blood cell quantity keeps the patient energetic and spirited and is crucial to staying alive.
There are three important ways in which the kidney patient loses red blood cells. The first way is bone marrow suppression. The second way is bleeding. The third way is called hemodilution. Maintaining a stable red blood cell quantity keeps the patient energetic and spirited and is crucial to staying alive.
Thrombocytopenia in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a condition called thrombocytopenia, his platelet count is low. When the platelet count is low, it is harder for clotting to occur.
If your pet has a condition called thrombocytopenia, his platelet count is low. When the platelet count is low, it is harder for clotting to occur.
Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals
But it still seems to shock people to learn that dogs, cats, rabbits, rats and a host of other domestic species can get breast cancer, too. Since the aim of Breast Cancer Awareness Month is to raise awareness, our aim here is to wave the flag for those who can’t speak for themselves and raise awareness of mammary cancer in companion animals. We also want people to know that breast cancer and mammary gland cancer are the same disease; it’s just called by a different name in other species.
But it still seems to shock people to learn that dogs, cats, rabbits, rats and a host of other domestic species can get breast cancer, too. Since the aim of Breast Cancer Awareness Month is to raise awareness, our aim here is to wave the flag for those who can’t speak for themselves and raise awareness of mammary cancer in companion animals. We also want people to know that breast cancer and mammary gland cancer are the same disease; it’s just called by a different name in other species.
Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent
Cancer cells go mad systematically. The cellular delinquents bust past the body's natural immune system, as though a gate was left open, burgeoning into abnormal cells.
Cancer cells go mad systematically. The cellular delinquents bust past the body's natural immune system, as though a gate was left open, burgeoning into abnormal cells.
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs
These drugs are typically used to treat lymphoma.
These drugs are typically used to treat lymphoma.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiosarcoma has three classic locations: skin and subcutaneous forms, splenic forms, and heart-based forms. With the exception of the skin form, which can often be eliminated by surgery, a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma is bad news.
Hemangiosarcoma has three classic locations: skin and subcutaneous forms, splenic forms, and heart-based forms. With the exception of the skin form, which can often be eliminated by surgery, a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma is bad news.
Injection Site Sarcoma (Cancer) in Cats
Fibrosarcomas have been recognized for a very long time as difficult, deeply rooted tumors of cats. What has only recently been recognized is the potential for vaccination to lead to the formation of these tumors.
Fibrosarcomas have been recognized for a very long time as difficult, deeply rooted tumors of cats. What has only recently been recognized is the potential for vaccination to lead to the formation of these tumors.
Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats
Unfortunately, most insulinomas in dogs and cats are malignant. This is bad news but the good news is that regardless of this fact, surgery is still helpful as the bulk of the tumor (if not all of it) can be removed.
Unfortunately, most insulinomas in dogs and cats are malignant. This is bad news but the good news is that regardless of this fact, surgery is still helpful as the bulk of the tumor (if not all of it) can be removed.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Some lung tumors are benign, and some are not
Some lung tumors are benign, and some are not
Lymphoma
This form of cancer, also called lymphosarcoma, is the most common malignancy of dogs, cats, and humans. A plentitude of information is available, information that is necessary in order to make intelligent decisions about an affected pet.
This form of cancer, also called lymphosarcoma, is the most common malignancy of dogs, cats, and humans. A plentitude of information is available, information that is necessary in order to make intelligent decisions about an affected pet.
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma accounts for one third of all cancers developed by cats. When the mediastinal lymph nodes become infiltrated with lymphoma, a mass is apparent in the mediastinum and a cancerous fluid fills the chest, restricting breathing. The fluid can be tapped but it will be back without treatment.
Lymphoma accounts for one third of all cancers developed by cats. When the mediastinal lymph nodes become infiltrated with lymphoma, a mass is apparent in the mediastinum and a cancerous fluid fills the chest, restricting breathing. The fluid can be tapped but it will be back without treatment.
Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs
There are three types of skin lymphoma: mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.
There are three types of skin lymphoma: mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Mammary Tumors in Cats
In cats with mammary tumors, approximately 90% are malignant with rapid spread to adjacent glands and the nearest set of lymph nodes.
In cats with mammary tumors, approximately 90% are malignant with rapid spread to adjacent glands and the nearest set of lymph nodes.
Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Most mast cell tumors arise in the skin but technically they can arise anywhere that mast cells are found. Mast cell tumors are notoriously invasive and difficult to treat.
Most mast cell tumors arise in the skin but technically they can arise anywhere that mast cells are found. Mast cell tumors are notoriously invasive and difficult to treat.
Meningioma in Dogs and Cats
Meningioma is the most common brain tumor of cats and dogs. Meningiomas are generally benign. In dogs, seizures are the most common sign. In cats, signs are more vague and consist of listlessness and behavior changes.
Meningioma is the most common brain tumor of cats and dogs. Meningiomas are generally benign. In dogs, seizures are the most common sign. In cats, signs are more vague and consist of listlessness and behavior changes.
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs, but cure is rare
Myeloma-Related Disorders in Cats
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Myeloma is a type of cancer that affects plasma cells. Plasma cells that become cancerous are known as myeloma cells.
Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The oral squamous cell carcinoma does not spread as you normally think of a cancer spreading, but it is so locally invasive that it carries a poor prognosis. The only hope of good survival comes from early detection. Learn what to look for and what important risk factors are.
The oral squamous cell carcinoma does not spread as you normally think of a cancer spreading, but it is so locally invasive that it carries a poor prognosis. The only hope of good survival comes from early detection. Learn what to look for and what important risk factors are.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
The squamous cell carcinoma is not only the most common oral malignancy in cats, it has one of the poorest outcomes.
The squamous cell carcinoma is not only the most common oral malignancy in cats, it has one of the poorest outcomes.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
When squamous cell carcinoma occurs in the mouth and throat, it's called oral squamous cell carcinoma. In these oral cases, the lesion is usually located on the gums or tonsils.
When squamous cell carcinoma occurs in the mouth and throat, it's called oral squamous cell carcinoma. In these oral cases, the lesion is usually located on the gums or tonsils.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
The transitional cell carcinoma is a particularly unpleasant tumor of the urinary bladder that usually grows in the lower neck of the bladder, causing a partial or complete obstruction to urination. Bloody urine and straining to urinate are typically the signs noted by the owner.
The transitional cell carcinoma is a particularly unpleasant tumor of the urinary bladder that usually grows in the lower neck of the bladder, causing a partial or complete obstruction to urination. Bloody urine and straining to urinate are typically the signs noted by the owner.
Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats
Atrial fibrillation (sometimes called "A fib") is an arrhythmia, an irregularity of the heart's rhythm.
Atrial fibrillation (sometimes called "A fib") is an arrhythmia, an irregularity of the heart's rhythm.
Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Cardiomyopathy means heart muscle disease.
Cardiomyopathy means heart muscle disease.
Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats
In congestive heart failure, fluid is retained in specific parts of the body, depending on the side of the heart that is diseased.
In congestive heart failure, fluid is retained in specific parts of the body, depending on the side of the heart that is diseased.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most common acquired heart diseases in dogs.  DCM is a disease of the heart muscle.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the most common acquired heart diseases in dogs.  DCM is a disease of the heart muscle.
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (FATE or Saddle Thrombus)
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
FATE is a serious and painful condition with serious implications. It comes on suddenly and appears to paralyze the cat, causing one or both rear legs to become useless and even noticeably cold. The cat will hyperventilate and cry out with extreme pain. Despite the extreme presentation, the cat may be able to recover from the episode but it is important to understand how it came to be in order to make decisions.
Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats
A heart murmur is one of several types of abnormal sounds your veterinarian can hear when listening to your pet's heart with a stethoscope. The murmur itself is not treated; the underlying cause of the murmur may or may not be treated.
A heart murmur is one of several types of abnormal sounds your veterinarian can hear when listening to your pet's heart with a stethoscope. The murmur itself is not treated; the underlying cause of the murmur may or may not be treated.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets
High blood pressure is an extremely important concern in human medicine. High stress lifestyle, smoking, and high salt diet all contribute to this potentially dangerous condition and virtually everyone in the U.S. knows how serious it can be. But what about our pets? They don't smoke or worry about the mortgage and they don't deposit cholesterol in their blood vessels. They do, however, get high blood pressure, especially in age and here is what you probably should know.
High blood pressure is an extremely important concern in human medicine. High stress lifestyle, smoking, and high salt diet all contribute to this potentially dangerous condition and virtually everyone in the U.S. knows how serious it can be. But what about our pets? They don't smoke or worry about the mortgage and they don't deposit cholesterol in their blood vessels. They do, however, get high blood pressure, especially in age and here is what you probably should know.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in Cats
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common acquired heart diseases in cats but is rare in dogs.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common acquired heart diseases in cats but is rare in dogs.
Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats
Just like people, some pets need a pacemaker to keep their hearts ticking.
Just like people, some pets need a pacemaker to keep their hearts ticking.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats
Sometimes the ductus arteriosus fails to close in a newborn. It remains open, or patent, usually because the muscles in the ductus failed to form properly.
Sometimes the ductus arteriosus fails to close in a newborn. It remains open, or patent, usually because the muscles in the ductus failed to form properly.
Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats
The hepatic portal system consists of numerous veins, but sometimes these systems can go awry. The portal vein is the big one into the liver, where the smaller veins converge before entering the liver.
The hepatic portal system consists of numerous veins, but sometimes these systems can go awry. The portal vein is the big one into the liver, where the smaller veins converge before entering the liver.
Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is high blood pressure in the arteries leading in and out of your pet's lungs. If the high blood pressure becomes too severe, it can cause disease and failure of the right side of the heart.
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is high blood pressure in the arteries leading in and out of your pet's lungs. If the high blood pressure becomes too severe, it can cause disease and failure of the right side of the heart.
Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease
For pets with congestive heart failure, it is important to check the response to medication by measuring the respiratory rate at home.
For pets with congestive heart failure, it is important to check the response to medication by measuring the respiratory rate at home.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram
An echocardiogram is
a type of ultrasound that looks closely at the heart as well as inside and around it
An echocardiogram is
a type of ultrasound that looks closely at the heart as well as inside and around it
Bad Breath in Dogs and Cats
Halitosis, also called bad breath, is as an offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity. Bad breath is a common presenting pet odor complaint. Causes may be commonly be related to the mouth or rarely related to other health problems.
Halitosis, also called bad breath, is as an offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity. Bad breath is a common presenting pet odor complaint. Causes may be commonly be related to the mouth or rarely related to other health problems.
Cat's Teeth Examination for Cat Owners
It is easy to recognize if your cat has a broken leg, but how about a broken tooth? You would think pets would stop eating when they had oral problems. Unfortunately, this is not usually the case. By the time most owners recognize oral disease in their pets, the problem is chronic and progressive.
It is easy to recognize if your cat has a broken leg, but how about a broken tooth? You would think pets would stop eating when they had oral problems. Unfortunately, this is not usually the case. By the time most owners recognize oral disease in their pets, the problem is chronic and progressive.
Cleft Palate or Lip in Puppies and Kittens
With either type, it's difficult for the affected puppy or kitten to eat properly
With either type, it's difficult for the affected puppy or kitten to eat properly
Clinical Signs of Oral or Dental Disease in Pets
If you see any of these clinical signs, take your pet to your veterinarian for a complete oral examination.
If you see any of these clinical signs, take your pet to your veterinarian for a complete oral examination.
Dental Care and What to Expect
Root canals, dental x-rays, orthodontics, crowns, caps, implants, and periodontal surgery for pets? You must be kidding? Not at all. Dental procedures are routinely performed in veterinary practices daily. How does a loving pet owner know if dental care is needed and where can a pet owner go for advanced dental care.
Root canals, dental x-rays, orthodontics, crowns, caps, implants, and periodontal surgery for pets? You must be kidding? Not at all. Dental procedures are routinely performed in veterinary practices daily. How does a loving pet owner know if dental care is needed and where can a pet owner go for advanced dental care.
Dental Care in Cats
Feline dental pathology and care are perhaps the most overlooked and under-treated areas in small animal medicine.
Feline dental pathology and care are perhaps the most overlooked and under-treated areas in small animal medicine.
Gingivostomatitis in Cats
FGS is a severe oral disease that affects some cats where the body becomes allergic to plaque around the teeth.
FGS is a severe oral disease that affects some cats where the body becomes allergic to plaque around the teeth.
Oral Masses/Ulcers in Dogs and Cats
Some dogs and cats develop growths in their mouths. Similar to humans, these growths may be benign or malignant. Once a mass is noticed, analysis must be made to determine the cause of the growth.
Some dogs and cats develop growths in their mouths. Similar to humans, these growths may be benign or malignant. Once a mass is noticed, analysis must be made to determine the cause of the growth.
Orthodontics for Pets
Just as you would want to cure a painful skin condition or sore joint in your pet, you should also consider relieving pain in your pet's mouth. When an oral problem is caused by poorly aligned teeth, orthodontic treatment may be needed.
Just as you would want to cure a painful skin condition or sore joint in your pet, you should also consider relieving pain in your pet's mouth. When an oral problem is caused by poorly aligned teeth, orthodontic treatment may be needed.
Periodontal Disease in Dogs and Cats
Periodontal disease is inflammation of some or all of a tooth's support. When compared to gingivitis, periodontitis indicates bone loss. If left untreated, periodontitis may cause loose painful teeth as well as internal disease. Periodontal disease is caused by plaque (bacteria).
Periodontal disease is inflammation of some or all of a tooth's support. When compared to gingivitis, periodontitis indicates bone loss. If left untreated, periodontitis may cause loose painful teeth as well as internal disease. Periodontal disease is caused by plaque (bacteria).
Periodontal Disease in Pets
More than 85% of dogs and cats older than 4 years have periodontal pathology.
More than 85% of dogs and cats older than 4 years have periodontal pathology.
Plasma Cell Stomatitis in Cats
Expect an affected cat to require teeth cleaning under general anesthesia at least every 6 months. If medical management fails, all teeth need to be removed.
Expect an affected cat to require teeth cleaning under general anesthesia at least every 6 months. If medical management fails, all teeth need to be removed.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Retained Baby Teeth in Dogs and Cats Need Surgical Extraction
When deciduous (baby) teeth don't fall out to make way for the permanent teeth, they are called retained deciduous teeth. Retained deciduous teeth should be extracted surgically soon after they are discovered because they will cause dental problems (overcrowding in the mouth, plaque buildup, malocclusion, etc.).
When deciduous (baby) teeth don't fall out to make way for the permanent teeth, they are called retained deciduous teeth. Retained deciduous teeth should be extracted surgically soon after they are discovered because they will cause dental problems (overcrowding in the mouth, plaque buildup, malocclusion, etc.).
Salivary Mucocele in Dogs and Cats
The most common place for a salivary mucocele is on or beneath the lower jaw or under the tongue
The most common place for a salivary mucocele is on or beneath the lower jaw or under the tongue
Stomatitis in Cats
Cats can be affected by inflammation of the entire mouth called stomatitis or lymphocytic plasmacytic syndrome (LPS).
Cats can be affected by inflammation of the entire mouth called stomatitis or lymphocytic plasmacytic syndrome (LPS).
Tooth Resorption in Cats
A common feline oral malady is the feline oral resorptive lesion (FORL).
A common feline oral malady is the feline oral resorptive lesion (FORL).
Toothbrushing and Dental Prophylaxis in Cats and Dogs
Why should I brush my dog's or cat's teeth?
Why should I brush my dog's or cat's teeth?
Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
With spot-on preventives, there is the possibility that certain individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product.
Breed-Related Dermatoses in Dogs and Cats
Cat and dog breed-related skin diseases are listed.
Cat and dog breed-related skin diseases are listed.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Cutaneous Lymphoma in Cats
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
The disease is complex and there are several forms of it, without veterinary consensus on how to treat an individual cat.
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Cuterebriasis is a Parasite Causing Skin Infections in Dogs and Cats
Treatment (removal of the larva) is one of the simplest things in veterinary medicine; your veterinarian will probe and enlarge the breathing hole, grasp the parasite with forceps, and just pull the invader out.
Treatment (removal of the larva) is one of the simplest things in veterinary medicine; your veterinarian will probe and enlarge the breathing hole, grasp the parasite with forceps, and just pull the invader out.
Demodectic Mange in Cats
Demodectic mange in dogs is extremely common, especially in puppies. Demodicosis in cats is much more unusual.
Demodectic mange in dogs is extremely common, especially in puppies. Demodicosis in cats is much more unusual.
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex in Cats
Feline allergic skin disease can take some highly ulcerative forms, especially involving the upper lip. Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex is a hard condition to explain, especially since it has several forms, but we will give it a try.
Feline allergic skin disease can take some highly ulcerative forms, especially involving the upper lip. Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex is a hard condition to explain, especially since it has several forms, but we will give it a try.
Feline Acne
While the initial acne and infection can be healed, additional outbreaks may occur.
While the initial acne and infection can be healed, additional outbreaks may occur.
Flea and Tick Control Products for Dogs and Cats
The comparison charts - one for dogs, one for cats - allows side-by-side glimpse of available products so you can determine what is best for your pets.
The comparison charts - one for dogs, one for cats - allows side-by-side glimpse of available products so you can determine what is best for your pets.
Flea Control for Allergic Dogs and Cats
For some pets, fleas are just an annoyance. But when a pet is allergic to fleas or has other types of allergic skin disease, the need to control fleas is more critical.
For some pets, fleas are just an annoyance. But when a pet is allergic to fleas or has other types of allergic skin disease, the need to control fleas is more critical.
Fleas: Know your Enemy
Fleas are not just a nuisance; they can kill, cause serious skin disease, and transmit infections and parasites.
Fleas are not just a nuisance; they can kill, cause serious skin disease, and transmit infections and parasites.
Fur Mowing in Cats
Got a cat with a large balding spot? Wondering why the fur is falling out? Chances are excellent that the fur is not falling out at all; it is being licked off instead. Is the cat anxious? Obsessive? Maybe, but it is likely that the cat is just plain itchy. There is generally a medical approach to this problem.
Got a cat with a large balding spot? Wondering why the fur is falling out? Chances are excellent that the fur is not falling out at all; it is being licked off instead. Is the cat anxious? Obsessive? Maybe, but it is likely that the cat is just plain itchy. There is generally a medical approach to this problem.
Hemangioma in Dogs and Cats
Hemangiomas are a type of benign tumor of the blood vessels or skin
Hemangiomas are a type of benign tumor of the blood vessels or skin
Hot Spots (Pyotraumatic Dermatitis) in Dogs and Cats
Hot spots are weepy, wet, red and sometimes bloody when they are fresh, and dry and scabby when they are resolving.
Hot spots are weepy, wet, red and sometimes bloody when they are fresh, and dry and scabby when they are resolving.
Hot Spots in Dogs and Cats
A hot spot is a superficial skin infection that results when the normal skin bacteria overrun the skin's defenses as a result of damage to the skin surface.
A hot spot is a superficial skin infection that results when the normal skin bacteria overrun the skin's defenses as a result of damage to the skin surface.
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Is it possible to relieve a pet's itchy skin without the use of cortisone derivatives? Yes, it is.
Itching and Allergy in Cats
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Coping with an itchy pet can be an extremely frustrating experience for you, the pet owner, and can truly test the limits of the human-animal bond. Persistent scratching and grooming by a cat can also result in more skin damage and even cause open wounds.
Lipomas in Dogs and Cats
Oftentimes a lump turns out to be "just a lipoma" or simply a fatty tumor and nothing to worry about.
Oftentimes a lump turns out to be "just a lipoma" or simply a fatty tumor and nothing to worry about.
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
While a good fur coat generally protects our pets from sun-induced malignant melanoma, a melanoma diagnosis is still just as serious and potentially deadly in our pets as it is for people.
Notoedric Mange in Cats (Feline Scabies)
Dogs get sarcoptic mange but what do cats get? It turns out they have their very own mange mite: Notoedres cati. Notoedric mange is a rarity worldwide and many veterinary dermatologists never see a single case in their entire careers.
Dogs get sarcoptic mange but what do cats get? It turns out they have their very own mange mite: Notoedres cati. Notoedric mange is a rarity worldwide and many veterinary dermatologists never see a single case in their entire careers.
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune disease of the skin. Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop PF. Your pet’s veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications.
Plasma Cell Pododermatitis (Pillow Foot) in Cats
Easy to recognize but not as easy to understand, this condition is often called pillow foot in cats for reasons that are obvious. This condition is described as rare. Most cats do not require treatment.
Easy to recognize but not as easy to understand, this condition is often called pillow foot in cats for reasons that are obvious. This condition is described as rare. Most cats do not require treatment.
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
Pyoderma in Dogs and Cats
Pyoderma is caused by bacterial infection of the skin. The causative organism is almost always
Staphylococcus
. Bacteria will not usually cause disease on normal skin, but other underlying skin diseases cause some changes in the skin surface making it susceptible to infection, leading to pyoderma.
Pyoderma is caused by bacterial infection of the skin. The causative organism is almost always
Staphylococcus
. Bacteria will not usually cause disease on normal skin, but other underlying skin diseases cause some changes in the skin surface making it susceptible to infection, leading to pyoderma.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Ringworm in Dogs and Cats
Ringworm is not a worm at all but a fungal infection of the skin. It is contagious to humans, too. This FAQ provides answers.
Ringworm is not a worm at all but a fungal infection of the skin. It is contagious to humans, too. This FAQ provides answers.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Workups for Itchy Dogs and Cats
Itching, or pruritus, is the most common symptom of skin disease in pets. Many conditions can cause a pet to itch, including allergies, fleas, and other skin parasites.
Itching, or pruritus, is the most common symptom of skin disease in pets. Many conditions can cause a pet to itch, including allergies, fleas, and other skin parasites.
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
AAFCO Pet Food Labeling
Pet food labeling does not provide detailed nutritional information and it’s easily misunderstood by pet owners
Pet food labeling does not provide detailed nutritional information and it’s easily misunderstood by pet owners
Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats
There are about as many diet options for your pet as there are for you, so which one is best? Breed, age, weight, allergies, medical conditions, and finances are some of the contributing factors that need to be considered when choosing an alternative diet.
There are about as many diet options for your pet as there are for you, so which one is best? Breed, age, weight, allergies, medical conditions, and finances are some of the contributing factors that need to be considered when choosing an alternative diet.
Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats
Loss of appetite is one of the most important criteria in determining if a pet is significantly ill or just having a minor malady. When the veterinarian says the pet has anorexia, it means the pet is not eating.
Loss of appetite is one of the most important criteria in determining if a pet is significantly ill or just having a minor malady. When the veterinarian says the pet has anorexia, it means the pet is not eating.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Cholangitis (Cholangiohepatitis) in Cats
The word cholangiohepatitis breaks down into "(bile), (vessel), hepat (liver) and (inflammation)." Putting this all together means inflammation of the liver and bile ducts. It is one of the four most common liver concerns in cats.
The word cholangiohepatitis breaks down into "(bile), (vessel), hepat (liver) and (inflammation)." Putting this all together means inflammation of the liver and bile ducts. It is one of the four most common liver concerns in cats.
Cholangitis and Cholangiohepatitis in Cats
Cholangitis means inflammation of the biliary tree. Cholangiohepatitis means inflammation of the biliary tree and surrounding liver cells.
Cholangitis means inflammation of the biliary tree. Cholangiohepatitis means inflammation of the biliary tree and surrounding liver cells.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats
Colitis means inflammation of the colon and that spells diarrhea - often with fresh blood or mucus - and straining and discomfort for the pet, as well as a mess to clean up.
Colitis means inflammation of the colon and that spells diarrhea - often with fresh blood or mucus - and straining and discomfort for the pet, as well as a mess to clean up.
Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats
Difficulty in passing stool can mean extra effort (constipation) or complete impossibility (obstipation). Management can be surgical or with medication, depending on severity. Find out the difference, and find out what Megacolon is, too, on this informative page.
Difficulty in passing stool can mean extra effort (constipation) or complete impossibility (obstipation). Management can be surgical or with medication, depending on severity. Find out the difference, and find out what Megacolon is, too, on this informative page.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Gallstones in Dogs and Cats
Gallstones form because either the gallbladder isn’t functioning properly or something is wrong with the bile
Gallstones form because either the gallbladder isn’t functioning properly or something is wrong with the bile
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Hairballs (Trichobezoars) In Cats
If a cat is throwing up hairballs, there is more going on than most owners realize.
If a cat is throwing up hairballs, there is more going on than most owners realize.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Hepatic Lipidosis (Fatty Liver Disease) in Cats
The liver failure cat is jaundiced, inappetent, frequently nauseated, and generally an obviously ill animal.
The liver failure cat is jaundiced, inappetent, frequently nauseated, and generally an obviously ill animal.
Hepatic Lipidosis in Cats
The primary disease that caused the problem also needs to be addressed
The primary disease that caused the problem also needs to be addressed
Infiltrative Bowel Disease in Cats
Chronic intestinal disease in cats can involve appetite loss, diarrhea, intestinal bleeding, vomiting, weight loss and debilitation. The intestinal tract does not lend itself to blood test evaluation so where do you go if intestinal disease is likely? Infiltration of the bowel by lymphocytes is a typical feature of the most common causes of chronic intestinal disease in cats.
Chronic intestinal disease in cats can involve appetite loss, diarrhea, intestinal bleeding, vomiting, weight loss and debilitation. The intestinal tract does not lend itself to blood test evaluation so where do you go if intestinal disease is likely? Infiltration of the bowel by lymphocytes is a typical feature of the most common causes of chronic intestinal disease in cats.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats
Does your pet seem to have chronic vomiting or diarrhea? Those can be signs of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Does your pet seem to have chronic vomiting or diarrhea? Those can be signs of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs
Irritable bowel syndrome is a psychosomatic disease. This means that it is the activity of the mind that causes the symptoms. Most people do not have difficulty imagining having so much anxiety that diarrhea results. Chronic anxiety can similarly result in chronic diarrhea. This is basically what irritable bowel syndrome is all about.
Irritable bowel syndrome is a psychosomatic disease. This means that it is the activity of the mind that causes the symptoms. Most people do not have difficulty imagining having so much anxiety that diarrhea results. Chronic anxiety can similarly result in chronic diarrhea. This is basically what irritable bowel syndrome is all about.
Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats
Pets, especially younger ones, have the unfortunate tendency to eat things they shouldn't and we aren't talking about food. Toys, socks, rocks and other materials find their way into pet stomachs but when the foreign body is a string, the consequences are especially dire.
Pets, especially younger ones, have the unfortunate tendency to eat things they shouldn't and we aren't talking about food. Toys, socks, rocks and other materials find their way into pet stomachs but when the foreign body is a string, the consequences are especially dire.
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
After blood testing and medical imaging has led to a diagnosis of liver tumor, many questions must be answered in order to make proper choices.
Pancreatitis in Cats
Many people have heard of the pancreas but are not sure what it does, where it is, or what a disaster it can be when it gets inflamed.
Many people have heard of the pancreas but are not sure what it does, where it is, or what a disaster it can be when it gets inflamed.
Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats
A portosystemic shunt happens when a pet's venous blood from the intestine bypasses the liver. The pet can be born with the shunt or can get it later.
A portosystemic shunt happens when a pet's venous blood from the intestine bypasses the liver. The pet can be born with the shunt or can get it later.
Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats
If your pet has a rectal prolapse, you may have noticed that recently he's been spending a lot of time trying to poop
If your pet has a rectal prolapse, you may have noticed that recently he's been spending a lot of time trying to poop
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Triaditis in Cats
Triaditis is a disease condition in cats in which they are simultaneously affected with three separate diseases: pancreatitis, cholangitis, and inflammatory bowel disease
Triaditis is a disease condition in cats in which they are simultaneously affected with three separate diseases: pancreatitis, cholangitis, and inflammatory bowel disease
Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens
An umbilical hernia is a condition in which abdominal contents (fat, intestines, etc.) protrude past the abdominal wall at the location where the umbilical cord was attached to the fetus.
An umbilical hernia is a condition in which abdominal contents (fat, intestines, etc.) protrude past the abdominal wall at the location where the umbilical cord was attached to the fetus.
Ear Infections (Otitis) in Dogs
Did you know the most common cause of recurrent ear infections is allergic skin disease? What do you do to keep the ear scratching and head shaking from becoming chronic?
Did you know the most common cause of recurrent ear infections is allergic skin disease? What do you do to keep the ear scratching and head shaking from becoming chronic?
Ear Mites in Dogs and Cats
This annoying parasite is a common source of ear infections, especially in cats and kittens. Where do they come from? How do you get rid of them?
This annoying parasite is a common source of ear infections, especially in cats and kittens. Where do they come from? How do you get rid of them?
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
Otitis Externa Treatment in Dogs and Cats
Otitis externa is an inflammation or infection of the external ear canal. Bacteria, yeast, ear mites, and allergies can all cause it. Addressing this problem involves four steps.
Otitis externa is an inflammation or infection of the external ear canal. Bacteria, yeast, ear mites, and allergies can all cause it. Addressing this problem involves four steps.
Total Ear Canal Ablation and Ventral Bulla Osteotomy (TECA) for End-Stage Ears in Dogs and Cats
In a TECA, all the diseased tissue including the entire ear canal, bones of the middle ear, etc., are simply removed and the healthy tissue around the ear is closed. This ends what has generally been a long tribulation of pain, odor, ear cleaning, and expensive veterinary medications and rechecks.
In a TECA, all the diseased tissue including the entire ear canal, bones of the middle ear, etc., are simply removed and the healthy tissue around the ear is closed. This ends what has generally been a long tribulation of pain, odor, ear cleaning, and expensive veterinary medications and rechecks.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease involving the body's handling of sugar. Learn about some of the basics of this common hormone problem of dogs and cats.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease involving the body's handling of sugar. Learn about some of the basics of this common hormone problem of dogs and cats.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Dietary Therapy for Hyperthyroidism in Cats
A new commercial diet created for hyperthyroid cats is now available at your veterinarian's clinic. Where this diet fits in this picture and whether it should replace traditional therapy or be considered an acceptable last resort remain to be seen over time.
A new commercial diet created for hyperthyroid cats is now available at your veterinarian's clinic. Where this diet fits in this picture and whether it should replace traditional therapy or be considered an acceptable last resort remain to be seen over time.
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats
Generally a high digestibility diet is the best choice for an EPI patient. These foods are low in fiber and fat and may be especially helpful for patients with trouble gaining weight. Many animals simply use enzymes mixed with their regular food.
Generally a high digestibility diet is the best choice for an EPI patient. These foods are low in fiber and fat and may be especially helpful for patients with trouble gaining weight. Many animals simply use enzymes mixed with their regular food.
Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
The goal in long-term management of diabetes mellitus is the alleviation of unpleasant clinical signs (constant thirst, weight loss etc.) and prevention of dangerous secondary conditions (infections, ketoacidosis, etc.). To accomplish this, blood sugar levels should be regulated between 250 mg/dl and 80 mg/dl. This is not as good as the body's natural regulation but it is a fair and achievable goal in most cases.
The goal in long-term management of diabetes mellitus is the alleviation of unpleasant clinical signs (constant thirst, weight loss etc.) and prevention of dangerous secondary conditions (infections, ketoacidosis, etc.). To accomplish this, blood sugar levels should be regulated between 250 mg/dl and 80 mg/dl. This is not as good as the body's natural regulation but it is a fair and achievable goal in most cases.
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats
Video and slides are provided for owners of diabetic cats who wish to learn how to conduct home tests that determine blood glucose (blood sugar) readings for their cat.
Video and slides are provided for owners of diabetic cats who wish to learn how to conduct home tests that determine blood glucose (blood sugar) readings for their cat.
Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats
Elevated calcium starts with the bones. They receive an inappropriate message to mobilize their calcium. This message is either from excess parathyroid hormone or from high amounts of parathyroid hormone-related protein. When calcium is removed from the bones, all that is left is a fibrous scaffold, which is not really strong enough to support us. Our bones break, even fold.
Elevated calcium starts with the bones. They receive an inappropriate message to mobilize their calcium. This message is either from excess parathyroid hormone or from high amounts of parathyroid hormone-related protein. When calcium is removed from the bones, all that is left is a fibrous scaffold, which is not really strong enough to support us. Our bones break, even fold.
Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats
Hyperlipidemia is a general term for disorders in which too many fat molecules (called lipids) circulate in the blood. The two most important lipids in pets are cholesterol and triglycerides.
Hyperlipidemia is a general term for disorders in which too many fat molecules (called lipids) circulate in the blood. The two most important lipids in pets are cholesterol and triglycerides.
Hyperthyroidism Medication for Cats (Methimazole)
The most common medication prescribed to treat feline hyperthyroidism is called methimazole (trade name Tapazole or Felimazole).
The most common medication prescribed to treat feline hyperthyroidism is called methimazole (trade name Tapazole or Felimazole).
Hyperthyroidism Treatment Options in Cats
Three methods of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism are discussed.
Three methods of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism are discussed.
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin is the injectable medication you use to control your diabetic cat's blood sugar. This beginner's guide will explain how to give your cat insulin injections.
Insulin is the injectable medication you use to control your diabetic cat's blood sugar. This beginner's guide will explain how to give your cat insulin injections.
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant. Cats with thyroid carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats
Monitoring is crucial to determining your pet's proper insulin dose. Much monitoring can be done at home; however, some tests simply must be done at the veterinarian's office.
Monitoring is crucial to determining your pet's proper insulin dose. Much monitoring can be done at home; however, some tests simply must be done at the veterinarian's office.
Signs, Symptoms, and Diagnosis of Hyperthyroidism in Cats
Do you have an older cat who is losing weight despite having an excellent appetite? That is the hallmark sign of hyperthyroidism in cats.
Do you have an older cat who is losing weight despite having an excellent appetite? That is the hallmark sign of hyperthyroidism in cats.
Surgical Treatment for Feline Hyperthyroidism
Considering that the average hyperthyroid cat is a geriatric patient with special potential for high blood pressure and heart disease, quite a bit of patient preparation is necessary to reduce anesthetic risk.
Considering that the average hyperthyroid cat is a geriatric patient with special potential for high blood pressure and heart disease, quite a bit of patient preparation is necessary to reduce anesthetic risk.
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Excess thirst, excess urination, excess appetite, poor hair coat and a pot-bellied appearance. This is a classical disease for which lots of information is available. We have attempted to include an explanation of this complicated problem and all the latest information.
Thyroid Treatment Using Radiotherapy for Cats
This method of therapy is generally considered the safest and most effective method of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism.
This method of therapy is generally considered the safest and most effective method of treatment for feline hyperthyroidism.
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing corticosteroids,
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Cataracts in Dogs and Cats
Cataracts are an important cause of blindness in the dog. Through special surgery, it may be possible to restore vision. Would you recognize a cataract if you saw one in your cat or dog?
Cataracts are an important cause of blindness in the dog. Through special surgery, it may be possible to restore vision. Would you recognize a cataract if you saw one in your cat or dog?
Causes of Blindness in Dogs and Cats
Abnormalities in eye structures may lead to blindness
Abnormalities in eye structures may lead to blindness
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Corneal Ulcers and Erosions in Dogs and Cats
A scratch or scrape on the eye is extremely painful, causing squinting, redness and excess tears.  What do you need to know about taking care of a pet with this condition? Read about the diagnosis and treatment of corneal ulcers and erosions.
A scratch or scrape on the eye is extremely painful, causing squinting, redness and excess tears.  What do you need to know about taking care of a pet with this condition? Read about the diagnosis and treatment of corneal ulcers and erosions.
Dry Eye (Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca) in Dogs and Cats
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or KCS, is a fancy way of saying the eye is dry. There are many causes of dry eye, but the most common one appears to be immune mediated destruction of the tear-producing gland tissue.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or KCS, is a fancy way of saying the eye is dry. There are many causes of dry eye, but the most common one appears to be immune mediated destruction of the tear-producing gland tissue.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Eye Removal (Enucleation) in Pets
Enucleation means removal of the eye. What are the common reasons this procedure may be necessary, what can you expect after surgery, and what complications are possible?
Enucleation means removal of the eye. What are the common reasons this procedure may be necessary, what can you expect after surgery, and what complications are possible?
Glaucoma in Dogs and Cats
Glaucoma is an eye disease that can cause significant pain and lead to blindness.
Glaucoma is an eye disease that can cause significant pain and lead to blindness.
Haws Syndrome in Cats
Haws syndrome is an elevation of the third eyelid in both eyes.
Haws syndrome is an elevation of the third eyelid in both eyes.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Iris Coloboma in Dogs and Cats
The iris coloboma, which is relatively uncommon, does not affect vision, nor does it progress to anything else.
The iris coloboma, which is relatively uncommon, does not affect vision, nor does it progress to anything else.
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) in Dogs
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) describes a group of inherited degenerative disorders of the retina that occur commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. Dogs eventually become blind, but remain happy and otherwise healthy.
Progressive Retinal Atrophy (PRA) describes a group of inherited degenerative disorders of the retina that occur commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. Dogs eventually become blind, but remain happy and otherwise healthy.
Uveitis in Dogs and Cats
Uveitis is an inflammation of the dark tissues (uvea) of the eye
Uveitis is an inflammation of the dark tissues (uvea) of the eye
Abscess: First Aid
A localized accumulation of pus, usually caused by an infection introduced from an animal bite or other penetrating wound.
A localized accumulation of pus, usually caused by an infection introduced from an animal bite or other penetrating wound.
Bandaging: First Aid
We use bandages for several reasons: to protect wounds from the environment, protect the environment from wounds, and to discourage the pet from licking or irritating a wound.
We use bandages for several reasons: to protect wounds from the environment, protect the environment from wounds, and to discourage the pet from licking or irritating a wound.
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Any insect sting or spider bite can cause problems for your pet.
Any insect sting or spider bite can cause problems for your pet.
Bleeding: First Aid
Learn how to stop bleeding in an emergency.
Learn how to stop bleeding in an emergency.
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Burns: First Aid
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
A burn is any injury of tissue caused by heat, flame, chemicals, or electricity. Burn classification determines the severity of the wound based on the depth of the tissue injury.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
CPCR (formerly referred to as CPR) is the treatment required to save an animal or human life when suffering cardiopulmonary arrest.
CPCR (formerly referred to as CPR) is the treatment required to save an animal or human life when suffering cardiopulmonary arrest.
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Injury to tissue caused by contact with harmful chemicals such as lye, acids, and strong cleaning supplies.
Choking: First Aid
Choking is interference with breathing caused by foreign material in, or compression on, the trachea (windpipe).
Choking is interference with breathing caused by foreign material in, or compression on, the trachea (windpipe).
Dehydration: First Aid
Excess loss of water from the body or inappropriate intake of water into the body.
Excess loss of water from the body or inappropriate intake of water into the body.
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of stomach contents through the mouth.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Suffocation caused by the filling of the lungs with water or other fluid. What to do?
Suffocation caused by the filling of the lungs with water or other fluid. What to do?
Electrical Burns: First Aid
It is imperative that you do not touch the pet until the electrical source has been turned off or moved. Electricity can flow through your pet and affect you as well.
It is imperative that you do not touch the pet until the electrical source has been turned off or moved. Electricity can flow through your pet and affect you as well.
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Seek veterinary attention immediately as signs can indicate potentially serious eye problems that can risk your pet's vision.
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fainting and dizziness may be associated with anything from low blood sugar to severe heart disease.
Fainting and dizziness may be associated with anything from low blood sugar to severe heart disease.
Fever: First Aid
Fever is the elevation of body temperature in response to infection or inflammation.
Fever is the elevation of body temperature in response to infection or inflammation.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
The elevation of body temperature above normal. It is sometimes indicative of a fever, but it can also be associated with severe conditions such as heat stroke or heat prostration.
The elevation of body temperature above normal. It is sometimes indicative of a fever, but it can also be associated with severe conditions such as heat stroke or heat prostration.
Hypothermia: First Aid
When a pet's body temperature dips below 100.5 degrees, the pet is too cold and must be warmed.
When a pet's body temperature dips below 100.5 degrees, the pet is too cold and must be warmed.
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Dogs frequently carry sticks in their mouths and suffer impalements when an end of the stick jams into the ground.
Dogs frequently carry sticks in their mouths and suffer impalements when an end of the stick jams into the ground.
Introduction: First Aid
VeterinaryPartner.com has provided this complete reference book online for you to browse through, expanding your knowledge of Dog & Cat First Aid.
VeterinaryPartner.com has provided this complete reference book online for you to browse through, expanding your knowledge of Dog & Cat First Aid.
Nosebleed: First Aid
If the nose is bleeding profusely and/or the bleeding lasts more than 5 minutes, seek veterinary attention.
If the nose is bleeding profusely and/or the bleeding lasts more than 5 minutes, seek veterinary attention.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
To identify an illness or abnormal situation, you must first be able to recognize what is normal for your pet.
To identify an illness or abnormal situation, you must first be able to recognize what is normal for your pet.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
What can you do to prevent a crisis?
What can you do to prevent a crisis?
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Shock: First Aid
The term shock can mean different things to different people, and medical professionals still debate the true meaning of the word. Regardless of cause, shock is life-threatening and requires immediate attention and treatment.
The term shock can mean different things to different people, and medical professionals still debate the true meaning of the word. Regardless of cause, shock is life-threatening and requires immediate attention and treatment.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Sunburn: First Aid
Damage to the tissues caused by exposure to the sun's rays.
Damage to the tissues caused by exposure to the sun's rays.
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
The first aid provider must not only identify and treat injury or illness, but must also safely transport the patient to the veterinary facility for treatment.
The first aid provider must not only identify and treat injury or illness, but must also safely transport the patient to the veterinary facility for treatment.
Wound Care for Pets
Wounds bigger than a small cut are almost always worse than they look
Wounds bigger than a small cut are almost always worse than they look
Wounds: First Aid
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Many wounds will require pain control and sedation or general anesthesia for cleaning and closure once your pet has been evaluated by a veterinarian.
Wrapping Up First Aid
If you have questions, seek advice from a veterinarian.
If you have questions, seek advice from a veterinarian.
Abscesses from Bite Wounds
At most clinics, a week doesn't go by without seeing a cat or two in this condition. Cats fight, bite, and get infected. What do you need to know?
At most clinics, a week doesn't go by without seeing a cat or two in this condition. Cats fight, bite, and get infected. What do you need to know?
Anaplasmosis
Anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease. Two forms of anaplasmosis are known: granulocytic anaplasmosis and infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia.A dog can have both infections at the same time
Anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease. Two forms of anaplasmosis are known: granulocytic anaplasmosis and infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia.A dog can have both infections at the same time
Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne
Signs can include poor appetite and fever. Joints are commonly affected,
Signs can include poor appetite and fever. Joints are commonly affected,
Antibiotic Use in Pets
Antibiotics are useless against viruses and will not cure viral infections. Previously, people and pets with viruses were given preventive antibiotics to prevent secondary infections, but this approach is not favored anymore because of the bacteria's ability to develop antibiotic resistance.
Antibiotics are useless against viruses and will not cure viral infections. Previously, people and pets with viruses were given preventive antibiotics to prevent secondary infections, but this approach is not favored anymore because of the bacteria's ability to develop antibiotic resistance.
Aspergillosis in Cats
Aspergillosis infections in cats are rare and most commonly seen in cats with a poor immune system
Aspergillosis infections in cats are rare and most commonly seen in cats with a poor immune system
Bacterial Conjunctivitis in Cats
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, a tissue that makes up part of the eye and eyelid. Conjunctivitis is common in cats and can be a result of infection or injury.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby.  Most of these problems stem from contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Raw food diets for pets dramatically increase the risk of human exposure.
Bartonella and Cat Scratch Fever
Most people know very little about this infection other than it involves a fever spread by cat scratches. In fact, it involves infection by a bacterium called Bartonella henselae, which is spread by fleas.
Most people know very little about this infection other than it involves a fever spread by cat scratches. In fact, it involves infection by a bacterium called Bartonella henselae, which is spread by fleas.
Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats
Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that affects dogs and cats. Blastomycosis appears in only certain geographic areas in North America, most often the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence River valleys. Infection with Blastomyces occurs when a cat or dog inhales the fungal spores into the lungs.
Blastomycosis is a systemic fungal infection that affects dogs and cats. Blastomycosis appears in only certain geographic areas in North America, most often the Mississippi, Ohio, Missouri, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence River valleys. Infection with Blastomyces occurs when a cat or dog inhales the fungal spores into the lungs.
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Cats and Ferrets Had SARS in Laboratory Setting
The big SARS outbreak ended in 2003, but several smaller outbreaks were reported in 2004, and public health officials expected further outbreaks in the future. However, as of November, 2017, the WHO and the CDC both indicate that there have not been any more cases of SARS reported anywhere in the world.
The big SARS outbreak ended in 2003, but several smaller outbreaks were reported in 2004, and public health officials expected further outbreaks in the future. However, as of November, 2017, the WHO and the CDC both indicate that there have not been any more cases of SARS reported anywhere in the world.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal bite.
Clostridium difficile Becoming more Common in North America
It is unclear if C. difficile can be transmitted from pets to people. The types of C. difficile found in pets are often the same as those found in people, including the epidemic strain ribotype 027/NAP1. So it makes sense that C. difficile could potentially be transmitted between people and animals, but there is still no conclusive proof.
It is unclear if C. difficile can be transmitted from pets to people. The types of C. difficile found in pets are often the same as those found in people, including the epidemic strain ribotype 027/NAP1. So it makes sense that C. difficile could potentially be transmitted between people and animals, but there is still no conclusive proof.
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
Coccidia are parasites that commonly infect young animals housed in groups. Coccidia causes a bloody diarrhea that can be severe enough to be life threatening for a small animal. It is a common infection.
COVID-19 in a Tiger
Don’t over-react
Don’t over-react
Cryptosporidium is a Particularly Challenging Type of Coccidia for Pets
Cryptosporidium are similar to Coccidia and, until recent advances in molecular biology showed us otherwise, they were believed to be simply another species of Coccidia. They have some particularly unpleasant features.
Cryptosporidium are similar to Coccidia and, until recent advances in molecular biology showed us otherwise, they were believed to be simply another species of Coccidia. They have some particularly unpleasant features.
Cytauxzoonosis in Cats
Cytauxzoon felis is spread by tick bites. This condition has a very high mortality rate.
Cytauxzoon felis is spread by tick bites. This condition has a very high mortality rate.
Distemper (Panleukopenia) in Cats
Feline distemper, caused by a parvovirus, is a life-threatening disease. The virus is considered ubiquitous, meaning it is in virtually every place that is not regularly disinfected. The infection is highly contagious among unvaccinated cats, usually kittens and young adult cats living in groups. Barn cats, feral colonies, animal shelter groups, pet stores, and rescue facilities are high risk for outbreaks.
Feline distemper, caused by a parvovirus, is a life-threatening disease. The virus is considered ubiquitous, meaning it is in virtually every place that is not regularly disinfected. The infection is highly contagious among unvaccinated cats, usually kittens and young adult cats living in groups. Barn cats, feral colonies, animal shelter groups, pet stores, and rescue facilities are high risk for outbreaks.
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
FIV is a virus that causes AIDS in cats; however, there is a long asymptomatic period before AIDS occurs and our job is to prolong this asymptomatic period.
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a deadly infection in cats that is caused by the FIP virus. The disease occurs most commonly in young cats, although it can infect older cats too.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) is a deadly infection in cats that is caused by the FIP virus. The disease occurs most commonly in young cats, although it can infect older cats too.
Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV)
Feline leukemia virus, a retrovirus, is a common infection of cats. It is the cause of more cat deaths, directly or indirectly, than any other organism and is widespread in the cat population.
Feline leukemia virus, a retrovirus, is a common infection of cats. It is the cause of more cat deaths, directly or indirectly, than any other organism and is widespread in the cat population.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
We all know fleas are a nuisance and can lead to itching and dermatitis, but did you know a heavy flea infestation can be life threatening? The owners of most victims were not aware of the problem. Read more about this condition and who is most at risk.
Flea Control for Dogs and Cats
Fleas are the most common external parasite of companion animals. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most common skin disease of dogs and cats! In order to help select the most appropriate products to achieve a flea-free existence for an allergic pet, learn about the life cycle of the flea.
Fleas are the most common external parasite of companion animals. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most common skin disease of dogs and cats! In order to help select the most appropriate products to achieve a flea-free existence for an allergic pet, learn about the life cycle of the flea.
Giardia in Pets
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Giardia is the genus of a protozoan parasite that is infectious to both humans and pets all over the world.  Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia.  Infection is more common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
Do cats get heartworm? The answer to this question is an unequivocal yes but the situation is vastly different from the canine situation. It is important to understand the differences and understand why feline infection is so rare.
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
This bacterium is not new but focus on it by both the veterinary and human medical community certainly is. The role of Helicobacter in stomach ulcer formation is now well recognized. If you have a pet with chronic nausea, you may want to be familiar with this infection.
Herpes Viral Conjunctivitis: A Feline Problem
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Conjunctivitis in cats is usually of viral origin and usually that means a Herpesvirus. Herpesvirus grow in the tissues of the body that interface with the environment, such as the upper respiratory tissues and conjunctivae.
Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats
Histoplasmosis is a dangerous disease caused by fungus
Histoplasmosis is a dangerous disease caused by fungus
Hookworms in Cats and Dogs
The adult hookworm lives in the small intestine of its host. It hangs on to the intestinal wall using its six sharp teeth and unlike other worms that just absorb the digested food through their skin as it passes by, the hookworm drinks its host's blood. Humans can get hookworms too.
The adult hookworm lives in the small intestine of its host. It hangs on to the intestinal wall using its six sharp teeth and unlike other worms that just absorb the digested food through their skin as it passes by, the hookworm drinks its host's blood. Humans can get hookworms too.
How Toxoplasmosis Affects Your Cat
You have probably heard the warnings given to pregnant women about the parasite toxoplasmosis, advising against cleaning litterboxes and the dangers of ingesting raw/undercooked meat or milk products. But should you be concerned about how this parasite affects your cat?
You have probably heard the warnings given to pregnant women about the parasite toxoplasmosis, advising against cleaning litterboxes and the dangers of ingesting raw/undercooked meat or milk products. But should you be concerned about how this parasite affects your cat?
Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
In hydrometra and mucometra, the fluid is sterile and there is no infection. Only pyometra is an infection
In hydrometra and mucometra, the fluid is sterile and there is no infection. Only pyometra is an infection
Infectious Anemia in Cats
The infected cat's immune system is busy coating infected red blood cells with antibodies. Coated red blood cells are removed from the circulation by the spleen. This kills the organism, and the iron is harvested and recycled into new red blood cells. The problem is that so many red blood cells are being destroyed that the cat becomes anemic.
The infected cat's immune system is busy coating infected red blood cells with antibodies. Coated red blood cells are removed from the circulation by the spleen. This kills the organism, and the iron is harvested and recycled into new red blood cells. The problem is that so many red blood cells are being destroyed that the cat becomes anemic.
Lice in Dogs and Cats
When lice are found, it is usually in the dogs that are living in or were obtained from filthy, crowded conditions.
When lice are found, it is usually in the dogs that are living in or were obtained from filthy, crowded conditions.
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
Malassezia
ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected
MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats
MRSA is the abbreviation for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
MRSA is the abbreviation for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
.
MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats
In dogs and cats, the most common conditions associated with MRSA tend to be skin infections, post-operative incisional infections and wound infections. The bacteria have also been isolated from the urinary tract, auditory canal, skin, eye and joints.
In dogs and cats, the most common conditions associated with MRSA tend to be skin infections, post-operative incisional infections and wound infections. The bacteria have also been isolated from the urinary tract, auditory canal, skin, eye and joints.
Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats
Physaloptera
are rare but most common in the Midwestern U.S., particularly in pets with access to the outdoors
Physaloptera
are rare but most common in the Midwestern U.S., particularly in pets with access to the outdoors
Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pyothorax is one of those conditions where prognosis is reasonably good (assuming the patient is not too far gone at the time of presentation) as long as aggressive treatment is pursued. If one tries to go with inexpensive alternatives to proper treatment, a poor outcome is likely.
Pyothorax is one of those conditions where prognosis is reasonably good (assuming the patient is not too far gone at the time of presentation) as long as aggressive treatment is pursued. If one tries to go with inexpensive alternatives to proper treatment, a poor outcome is likely.
Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses
Pythiosis occurs in dogs and horses more often than in cats.
Pythiosis occurs in dogs and horses more often than in cats.
Rabies in Animals
Descriptions of rabies go back thousands of years as rabies has classically been one of the most feared infections of all time. Rabies is a serious disease, but fortunately it can also be easily prevented in dogs and cats by proper vaccination.
Descriptions of rabies go back thousands of years as rabies has classically been one of the most feared infections of all time. Rabies is a serious disease, but fortunately it can also be easily prevented in dogs and cats by proper vaccination.
Ringworm Environmental Decontamination: How to Clean Your Home When Your Pet Has Ringworm
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Infected dogs and cats will shed fur containing dermatophyte fungal spores into the home environment. This fur can re-infect dogs and cats and make it difficult to treat the dermatophyte infection.
Roundworms In Cats And Kittens
This common parasite can cause diarrhea and vomiting in cats and dogs, and some pet owners become very concerned when their pet expels a worm up to seven inches in length. Roundworms are also one of the few dog or cat parasites that can be dangerous when transmitted to humans.
This common parasite can cause diarrhea and vomiting in cats and dogs, and some pet owners become very concerned when their pet expels a worm up to seven inches in length. Roundworms are also one of the few dog or cat parasites that can be dangerous when transmitted to humans.
Taenia Species Tapeworms in Dogs and Cats
We have generated some confusion regarding tapeworms not contracted from fleas. There actually is another tapeworm besides the common tapeworm whose segments might be seen on a pet's anal area or on their feces.
We have generated some confusion regarding tapeworms not contracted from fleas. There actually is another tapeworm besides the common tapeworm whose segments might be seen on a pet's anal area or on their feces.
Tapeworms (Dipylidium caninum) in Dogs and Cats
Noticing something like grains of rice that move, something that looks like sesame seeds in your pet's bedding? Where do tapeworms come from, how can you eliminate them, and why do they come back?
Noticing something like grains of rice that move, something that looks like sesame seeds in your pet's bedding? Where do tapeworms come from, how can you eliminate them, and why do they come back?
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Tritrichomonas Infection Causes Diarrhea in Cats
Kittens and cats living in groups have an assortment of infectious diseases to contend with.
Tritrichomonas blagburni
is yet another infectious organism yielding diarrhea in cats.
Kittens and cats living in groups have an assortment of infectious diseases to contend with.
Tritrichomonas blagburni
is yet another infectious organism yielding diarrhea in cats.
Tritrichomoniasis in Cats
Begin Typing Here!
Begin Typing Here!
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
Upper Respiratory Infection in Cats
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
Does your cat sneeze, have runny eyes, and a runny nose? A cold for a cat is usually just a nuisance as a cold usually is for one of us. Sometimes, though, an upper respiratory infection can be serious.
When You Need Antibiotics for Your Pets, and When You Don’t
Antibiotics can be literal life savers for your pet when prescribed and used for the kind of infection that responds to the medication. But when given for something where they are not appropriate — such as a virus — antibiotics can create a long-lasting problem of antibiotic resistance.
Antibiotics can be literal life savers for your pet when prescribed and used for the kind of infection that responds to the medication. But when given for something where they are not appropriate — such as a virus — antibiotics can create a long-lasting problem of antibiotic resistance.
Whipworm Infection in Dogs and Cats
The whipworm of dogs is substantially smaller than the other worms (a mere 30-50 mm in length, about a half inch maximum). The "head" (or more accurately the digestive end of the worm) is skinny vs. its stout tail (or reproductive end) which gives the worm a whip shape, hence the name.
The whipworm of dogs is substantially smaller than the other worms (a mere 30-50 mm in length, about a half inch maximum). The "head" (or more accurately the digestive end of the worm) is skinny vs. its stout tail (or reproductive end) which gives the worm a whip shape, hence the name.
Ataxia in Dogs and Cats
Ataxia is a symptom caused by some type of central nervous system problem in which the brain cannot correctly tell the body what to do. It is an inability to make normal, coordinated, voluntary movements.
Ataxia is a symptom caused by some type of central nervous system problem in which the brain cannot correctly tell the body what to do. It is an inability to make normal, coordinated, voluntary movements.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cerebellar Hypoplasia Cats Are Clumsy from Birth
A cat with this disease clearly has balance issues: he walks with his legs widely placed for fear of falling, and places his feet clumsily. He often leans against walls for support. Sitting still, he may look like a fairly normal cat but once focused, tremors begin getting more wobbly as concentration becomes more intense. Despite the obvious impairment, cats with this condition are happy, able to feed themselves and use a litter box, and are felt to have good life quality.
A cat with this disease clearly has balance issues: he walks with his legs widely placed for fear of falling, and places his feet clumsily. He often leans against walls for support. Sitting still, he may look like a fairly normal cat but once focused, tremors begin getting more wobbly as concentration becomes more intense. Despite the obvious impairment, cats with this condition are happy, able to feed themselves and use a litter box, and are felt to have good life quality.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Cognitive Dysfunction Syndrome in Dogs
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS) is essentially the dog equivalent of Alzheimer's disease
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS) is essentially the dog equivalent of Alzheimer's disease
Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
It is a neurological condition that can occur in pets that already have liver disease
Horner's Syndrome in Cats and Dogs
Slight squint, small pupil, raised third eyelid... it all looks pretty strange, as if something is wrong with the eye. In fact, it is not the eye itself that is the problem, but rather it is a nerve problem. Read more about this symptom and its causes.
Slight squint, small pupil, raised third eyelid... it all looks pretty strange, as if something is wrong with the eye. In fact, it is not the eye itself that is the problem, but rather it is a nerve problem. Read more about this symptom and its causes.
Hydrocephalus (Water on the Brain) in Dogs and Cats
This condition literally means "water head" and is more commonly referred to as water on the brain. The central nervous system is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid that is secreted by chambers inside the brain. When fluid builds up, there is no room in the brain for extra volume and disaster can result. This condition is particularly common in dome-headed puppies.
This condition literally means "water head" and is more commonly referred to as water on the brain. The central nervous system is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid that is secreted by chambers inside the brain. When fluid builds up, there is no room in the brain for extra volume and disaster can result. This condition is particularly common in dome-headed puppies.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Hyperesthesia syndrome is felt to be a type of compulsive disorder, usually initiated when the cat is in conflict. The cat wants to perform one behavior but is prevented from doing so and ultimately in frustration performs another behavior. After a while, this second behavior, which frequently is grooming, is performed compulsively.
Hyperesthesia syndrome is felt to be a type of compulsive disorder, usually initiated when the cat is in conflict. The cat wants to perform one behavior but is prevented from doing so and ultimately in frustration performs another behavior. After a while, this second behavior, which frequently is grooming, is performed compulsively.
Hyperesthesia Syndrome in Cats
Feline Hyperesthesia syndrome (FHS) means “too much feeling”, hyperesthesia is the opposite of anesthesia which means a lack of feeling or no sensation at all.
Feline Hyperesthesia syndrome (FHS) means “too much feeling”, hyperesthesia is the opposite of anesthesia which means a lack of feeling or no sensation at all.
Manx Syndrome in Cats
Manx syndrome (sacrocaudal dysgenesis, sacrocaudal agenesis) is an array of problems involving the function of the hind legs, urinary bladder, and colon of a tailless cat. In affected cats, the spine and spinal cord are shortened because the last few vertebrae and spinal segments have not developed normally
Manx syndrome (sacrocaudal dysgenesis, sacrocaudal agenesis) is an array of problems involving the function of the hind legs, urinary bladder, and colon of a tailless cat. In affected cats, the spine and spinal cord are shortened because the last few vertebrae and spinal segments have not developed normally
Myasthenia Gravis in Dogs and Cats
Myasthenia gravis is a disease that interrupts the way nerves communicate with muscles. There is no treatment for the congenital form. The acquired form, which is an autoimmune disease, is treated medically with immunosuppressive agents.
Myasthenia gravis is a disease that interrupts the way nerves communicate with muscles. There is no treatment for the congenital form. The acquired form, which is an autoimmune disease, is treated medically with immunosuppressive agents.
Neuropathic Pain in Dogs and Cats
People who experience neuropathic pain describe it as "a pins and needles sensation," tingling, burning, itching, numbness or cold, and sometimes feeling as if they had received a small electric shock. Grades of neuropathic pain that have been established in human medicine are definite, probable and possible. Pets cannot describe their pain to us but we believe it's likely to be like what people have.
People who experience neuropathic pain describe it as "a pins and needles sensation," tingling, burning, itching, numbness or cold, and sometimes feeling as if they had received a small electric shock. Grades of neuropathic pain that have been established in human medicine are definite, probable and possible. Pets cannot describe their pain to us but we believe it's likely to be like what people have.
Paralysis: First Aid
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
It is extremely important to immobilize the spine of a suddenly paralyzed pet before and during transportation.
Seizure Disorders in Cats
Seizures are sudden fits of uncontrollable movement and can include twitching, shaking, and/or muscle spasms
Seizures are sudden fits of uncontrollable movement and can include twitching, shaking, and/or muscle spasms
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Seizure activity that lasts longer than 3 to 5 minutes can cause severe side effects, such as fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema) or brain (cerebral edema). A dramatic rise in body temperature (hyperthermia) can also result, causing internal organ damage.
Serotonin Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Serotonin syndrome is a serious drug reaction to medications that build up high levels of serotonin in the body. Serotonin syndrome can be a life-threatening situation, therefore if you think your pet is developing it, visit a veterinarian immediately.
Serotonin syndrome is a serious drug reaction to medications that build up high levels of serotonin in the body. Serotonin syndrome can be a life-threatening situation, therefore if you think your pet is developing it, visit a veterinarian immediately.
Spina Bifida in Dogs and Cats
The spinal cord is surrounded and protected by a bony tube made up of
a series of bones called vertebrae, linked together by intervertebral discs, ligaments, and muscles. This entire complex is referred to as the "spine.” Sometimes, abnormal growth and development of the spine happen before birth with both puppies and kittens, resulting in a spinal defect called Spina Bifida.
The spinal cord is surrounded and protected by a bony tube made up of
a series of bones called vertebrae, linked together by intervertebral discs, ligaments, and muscles. This entire complex is referred to as the "spine.” Sometimes, abnormal growth and development of the spine happen before birth with both puppies and kittens, resulting in a spinal defect called Spina Bifida.
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Tick paralysis is caused by neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain species of female ticks. Death can occur in untreated dogs from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
Traumatic Brain Injury in Dogs and Cats
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) occurs when a sudden event, such as a blow or fall, happens to the head. In both humans and animals, a head injury severe enough to damage the brain is referred to as traumatic brain injury or TBI.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) occurs when a sudden event, such as a blow or fall, happens to the head. In both humans and animals, a head injury severe enough to damage the brain is referred to as traumatic brain injury or TBI.
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
Most of us know that stroke involves some kind of blood clot lodging or forming somewhere and plugging an important blood vessel, preventing an important area from receiving circulation.
Vestibular Disease in Dogs and Cats
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Most people think their pet has had a stroke, but in fact a problem with the vestibular apparatus is to blame. The vestibular apparatus is the neurological equipment responsible for perceiving one's body's orientation relative to the earth (determining if you are upside-down, standing up straight, falling etc.).
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be the only sign or there might be a steady bloody drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as well as messy and we want to identify the cause and take care of it promptly. The problem is that there are many causes and not all of them are localized to the nose, and many are serious diseases.
Nasal Pharyngeal Polyps in Cats
Naso-pharyngeal polyps are the most common masses that are seen in the external ear canal in cats. They are benign growths.
Naso-pharyngeal polyps are the most common masses that are seen in the external ear canal in cats. They are benign growths.
Rhinitis in Dogs and Cats
Rhinitis is the inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose. It can occur by itself or as part of an upper respiratory illness/infection.
Rhinitis is the inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose. It can occur by itself or as part of an upper respiratory illness/infection.
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not anyone's friend. The failing kidney is no longer good at getting rid of excess phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the blood begin to rise.
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not anyone's friend. The failing kidney is no longer good at getting rid of excess phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the blood begin to rise.
Diabetic Cat Diet
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
It is now well known that optimal dietary management for diabetic cats consists of a high protein / low carbohydrate diet, a completely different strategy than what is recommended for diabetic dogs.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme complications of diabetes mellitus that can be experienced. Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis are in patients who were not previously known to be diabetic so the owner and pet must deal with two serious diagnoses at the same time.
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
The only common link to diet-associated cardiomyopathy that's been observed is "grain-free" diets.
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Have an itchy pet all year round? Maybe there is a food allergy. Just changing to a new diet probably won't be enough. Find out what to do here and see if your pet fits the profile for this condition.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs
Calcium is such a crucial component of our biochemistry that virtually any complete blood panel, whether human or veterinary, will include a measurement of calcium. Our bodies go to tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within a narrow range. We need a storage source to draw upon for when we need more circulating calcium as well as a system to unload excess.
Calcium is such a crucial component of our biochemistry that virtually any complete blood panel, whether human or veterinary, will include a measurement of calcium. Our bodies go to tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within a narrow range. We need a storage source to draw upon for when we need more circulating calcium as well as a system to unload excess.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Weight Loss for Obese Cats
Obesity is a preventable and treatable disease
Obesity is a preventable and treatable disease
Amputation is Preferable to Continued Pain
A letter from a veterinarian points out that amputation is far better than continued pain or euthanasia.
A letter from a veterinarian points out that amputation is far better than continued pain or euthanasia.
Arthritis in Dogs and Cats: What Can be Done?
Arthritis, also known as osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease, is a degenerative, progressive, and irreversible condition of the joints.
Arthritis, also known as osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease, is a degenerative, progressive, and irreversible condition of the joints.
Brachial Plexus Avulsion in Dogs and Cats
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
The brachial plexus is the term for the bundle of nerves in the armpit. Injury or trauma such as an automobile accident, a bite, or a wound in this area can damage and tear nerves.
Cervical (Neck) Disk Disease in Dogs and Cats
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
The pet can experience just some neck pain or complete paralysis of all four legs and no pain perception. An acute onset is an absolute emergency.
Diskospondylitis (Intervertebral Disk Infection) in Dogs and Cats
Diskospondylitis is a bacterial/fungal infection that can reach the intervertebral disks several ways.
Diskospondylitis is a bacterial/fungal infection that can reach the intervertebral disks several ways.
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Fracture: a break or crack in a bone. Learn about the different types of fractures and what to do.
Fractures in Dogs and Cats
If this article has caught your attention, it may be that your pet has had the misfortune of suffering a fractured bone. This is a traumatic experience for both you and your pet and there are a few things you should know to help both of you make the best of a bad situation!
If this article has caught your attention, it may be that your pet has had the misfortune of suffering a fractured bone. This is a traumatic experience for both you and your pet and there are a few things you should know to help both of you make the best of a bad situation!
Hemivertebrae are Congenitally Deformed Vertebra in Dogs and Cats
A hemivertebra is a congenitally deformed vertebra. Hemivertebrae of the tail are not a problem as there is no spinal cord tissue that far down.
A hemivertebra is a congenitally deformed vertebra. Hemivertebrae of the tail are not a problem as there is no spinal cord tissue that far down.
Hip Dislocation in Dogs and Cats
Hip dislocation is the common term for the separation of the femoral head from the pelvic acetabulum. In order for the hip to dislocate, trauma must be severe enough to break the capital ligament.
Hip dislocation is the common term for the separation of the femoral head from the pelvic acetabulum. In order for the hip to dislocate, trauma must be severe enough to break the capital ligament.
Medications for Degenerative Arthritis in Dogs and Cats
Arthritis pain causes discomfort and loss of mobility in aged pets, and there are numerous remedies on the market. Which ones can be combined? Which are proven reliable and which may only work in some individuals?
Arthritis pain causes discomfort and loss of mobility in aged pets, and there are numerous remedies on the market. Which ones can be combined? Which are proven reliable and which may only work in some individuals?
Normal Joints Look Like This in Dogs and Cats
A pet does not have to be a senior citizen to require joint care supplements or physical therapy. Degenerative arthritis can result from an injury or can be the result of genetics and joint conformation.
A pet does not have to be a senior citizen to require joint care supplements or physical therapy. Degenerative arthritis can result from an injury or can be the result of genetics and joint conformation.
Solensia™ (Frunevetmab Injection):  An Arthritis Medication Just for Cats
Solensia™ is an injectable medication specifically designed to treat cats for discomfort from arthritis.
Solensia™ is an injectable medication specifically designed to treat cats for discomfort from arthritis.
Spondylosis Deformans in Dogs and Cats
In dogs, spondylosis deformans occurs most often along lower back (lumbar) vertebrae. In cats, it tends to occur more often in the chest (thoracic) vertebrae.
In dogs, spondylosis deformans occurs most often along lower back (lumbar) vertebrae. In cats, it tends to occur more often in the chest (thoracic) vertebrae.
Tail Pull Injuries in Cats
Cats get their tails pulled or broken through an assortment of traumas. One might think a tail break would involve an obvious external wound but usually this is not the case; instead, nerve damage (from stretching of the cauda equina nerves) is the usual tip-off.
Cats get their tails pulled or broken through an assortment of traumas. One might think a tail break would involve an obvious external wound but usually this is not the case; instead, nerve damage (from stretching of the cauda equina nerves) is the usual tip-off.
Cryptorchidism (Retained Testicles) in Dogs and Cats
Cryptorchidism is a condition in which a male’s testicles have not descended (dropped) into the scrotum. Some cryptorchid animals are sterile and some are not.
Cryptorchidism is a condition in which a male’s testicles have not descended (dropped) into the scrotum. Some cryptorchid animals are sterile and some are not.
Ovarian Remnant Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
The spayed female pet has no ovaries and should not display any signs of a heat cycle but what happens if she does anyway? Where might these hormones be coming from?
The spayed female pet has no ovaries and should not display any signs of a heat cycle but what happens if she does anyway? Where might these hormones be coming from?
Paraphimosis and Phimosis in Dogs and Cats
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the penis, but it is not an erection. It is quite painful and thus medically urgent. Priapism is the inability to extend the penis beyond the sheath. Phimosis is rare, and is either congenital or acquired. Paraphimosis and phimosis are flip sides of the same coin, although they are not the same thing, nor are they treated the same way.
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the penis, but it is not an erection. It is quite painful and thus medically urgent. Priapism is the inability to extend the penis beyond the sheath. Phimosis is rare, and is either congenital or acquired. Paraphimosis and phimosis are flip sides of the same coin, although they are not the same thing, nor are they treated the same way.
Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
Pyometra is the life-threatening infection of the uterus that generally occurs in middle-aged to older female dogs in the 6 weeks following heat. A uterus with pyometra swells dramatically and is filled with pus, bacteria, dying tissue, and toxins. Without treatment, the pet is expected to die.
Pyometra is the life-threatening infection of the uterus that generally occurs in middle-aged to older female dogs in the 6 weeks following heat. A uterus with pyometra swells dramatically and is filled with pus, bacteria, dying tissue, and toxins. Without treatment, the pet is expected to die.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Breathing Problems: First Aid
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Respiratory distress recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy breathing; cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips and mucous membranes); inability to inhale or exhale.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
When the fluid filling the chest is lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. The fluid is milky when it is drained from the chest, and its whiteness comes being from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific problem and requires specific therapy.
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being pushed through a hole in the diaphragm
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats
Most people have heard the term pneumonia and know it is a lung infection of some sort. In fact, pneumonia is not a very specific term and essentially means "lung inflammation of some sort." Pneumonia is an inflammation in deep lung tissues where oxygen is absorbed into the body and waste gases are removed. It has potential to be life-threatening regardless of its cause.
Most people have heard the term pneumonia and know it is a lung infection of some sort. In fact, pneumonia is not a very specific term and essentially means "lung inflammation of some sort." Pneumonia is an inflammation in deep lung tissues where oxygen is absorbed into the body and waste gases are removed. It has potential to be life-threatening regardless of its cause.
Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats
Pneumothorax may result from chest trauma, excessive pressure on the lungs, or underlying lung disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, etc.). In some cases, the cause is never discovered.
Pneumothorax may result from chest trauma, excessive pressure on the lungs, or underlying lung disease (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, etc.). In some cases, the cause is never discovered.
Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats
Pulmonic stenosis is the third most common congenital heart disease in dogs. It can be accompanied by additional heart defects to create a constellation of disaster or it can be mild enough to be no more than a surprising incidental finding.
Pulmonic stenosis is the third most common congenital heart disease in dogs. It can be accompanied by additional heart defects to create a constellation of disaster or it can be mild enough to be no more than a surprising incidental finding.
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats
Most calcium oxalate stones develop in cats between ages 5 and 14 years. 35% of cats with calcium oxalate bladder stones have elevated blood calcium (hypercalcemia). Burmese and Himalayan cats appear genetically predisposed to the development of calcium oxalate bladder stones.
Most calcium oxalate stones develop in cats between ages 5 and 14 years. 35% of cats with calcium oxalate bladder stones have elevated blood calcium (hypercalcemia). Burmese and Himalayan cats appear genetically predisposed to the development of calcium oxalate bladder stones.
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats
While struvite bladder stones can sometimes be found incidentally while looking into another problem, most of the time they are found when the cat is showing signs of lower urinary tract disease.
While struvite bladder stones can sometimes be found incidentally while looking into another problem, most of the time they are found when the cat is showing signs of lower urinary tract disease.
Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats
Usually a surgery called cystotomy is necessary to remove bladder stones.
Usually a surgery called cystotomy is necessary to remove bladder stones.
Blocked Cats are an Emergency
In advanced cases, where the urine flow has been stopped for more than 24 hours, cats can become systemically ill from retained toxins and start vomiting, or become very weak and lethargic. Death usually happens within 48 hours, and it's not a pleasant way to go.
In advanced cases, where the urine flow has been stopped for more than 24 hours, cats can become systemically ill from retained toxins and start vomiting, or become very weak and lethargic. Death usually happens within 48 hours, and it's not a pleasant way to go.
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin
Chronic kidney, or renal, failure is common among geriatric pets. As treatment frequently is long term, owners should understand their options. Topics discussed include definitions, medications used in treatment, diagnostics/helpful testing, and monitoring.
Chronic kidney, or renal, failure is common among geriatric pets. As treatment frequently is long term, owners should understand their options. Topics discussed include definitions, medications used in treatment, diagnostics/helpful testing, and monitoring.
Ectopic Ureters in Dogs
If your puppy has an ectopic ureter or even two, the only chance at resolving the incontinence is through surgery. This is expensive and often unsuccessful so it is important to know what you are getting into.
If your puppy has an ectopic ureter or even two, the only chance at resolving the incontinence is through surgery. This is expensive and often unsuccessful so it is important to know what you are getting into.
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
In glomerular disease, holes are punched out in the filtration system, allowing molecules that the body needs to keep entering the urine flow and be urinated away. Chronic inflammation leads to the holes in the filtration system.
In glomerular disease, holes are punched out in the filtration system, allowing molecules that the body needs to keep entering the urine flow and be urinated away. Chronic inflammation leads to the holes in the filtration system.
Idiopathic Cystitis in Cats
Formerly known as FUS or FLUTD, feline idiopathic cystitis simply means bladder inflammation of unknown cause. It is a set of symptoms that cannot be classified as a disease.
Formerly known as FUS or FLUTD, feline idiopathic cystitis simply means bladder inflammation of unknown cause. It is a set of symptoms that cannot be classified as a disease.
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet?
Most every animal hospital can provide diuresis: a therapy where extra fluid beyond what the patient can drink is provided, thus giving the kidney its medium so that it can remove toxic waste. This works well but there comes a time when even with plenty of fluids, the sick kidney simply cannot get the toxins out. For most patients this is the end of the line. In fact, dialysis may be another choice, though it is substantially more expensive than diuresis and dialysis centers for pets are still few and far between.
Most every animal hospital can provide diuresis: a therapy where extra fluid beyond what the patient can drink is provided, thus giving the kidney its medium so that it can remove toxic waste. This works well but there comes a time when even with plenty of fluids, the sick kidney simply cannot get the toxins out. For most patients this is the end of the line. In fact, dialysis may be another choice, though it is substantially more expensive than diuresis and dialysis centers for pets are still few and far between.
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
To the uninitiated, the impression may be that once your cat or dog receives a new kidney, life is renewed and all the kidney problems are solved. In fact, this is hardly the case. Immune-suppressive medications are needed to prevent rejection of the new organ, not to mention infection and other issues. A kidney transplant is a big deal regardless of the species of the recipient.
To the uninitiated, the impression may be that once your cat or dog receives a new kidney, life is renewed and all the kidney problems are solved. In fact, this is hardly the case. Immune-suppressive medications are needed to prevent rejection of the new organ, not to mention infection and other issues. A kidney transplant is a big deal regardless of the species of the recipient.
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats
Lithotripsy is a funny word for a minimally invasive alternative to urinary stone removal surgery.
Lithotripsy is a funny word for a minimally invasive alternative to urinary stone removal surgery.
Lower Urinary Tract Disease in Cats (also known as FLUTD)
Just about any inflammatory condition in the feline lower urinary tract creates the same collection of signs. Tumor, infection, bladder stone etc. all create the same clinical picture.
Just about any inflammatory condition in the feline lower urinary tract creates the same collection of signs. Tumor, infection, bladder stone etc. all create the same clinical picture.
Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats
With polyuria (PU) the body makes more urine than normal, which in turn causes a condition called polydipsia (PD), which means your dog or cat is extra thirsty because they are trying to stay hydrated. What are the reasons for these conditions?
With polyuria (PU) the body makes more urine than normal, which in turn causes a condition called polydipsia (PD), which means your dog or cat is extra thirsty because they are trying to stay hydrated. What are the reasons for these conditions?
Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats
Pyelonephritis is an inflammation of the kidney that frequently shows no symptoms and thus it is not usually recognized until the signs become severe. It may not be diagnosed until histopathology is done on the kidney after the pet's death.
Pyelonephritis is an inflammation of the kidney that frequently shows no symptoms and thus it is not usually recognized until the signs become severe. It may not be diagnosed until histopathology is done on the kidney after the pet's death.
Sterile Cystitis (Pandora Syndrome) in Cats
Also known as Feline Interstitial Cystitis, Feline Idiopathic Cystitis, FIC. Cystitis may result from a bacterial infection or bladder stones. Dogs rarely get sterile cystitis, while it’s quite common among young to middle-aged cats.
Also known as Feline Interstitial Cystitis, Feline Idiopathic Cystitis, FIC. Cystitis may result from a bacterial infection or bladder stones. Dogs rarely get sterile cystitis, while it’s quite common among young to middle-aged cats.
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to urinate.
Urinary Blockage in Cats
Every owner of a male cat should be familiar with this emergency condition. The recognition of straining to urinate is the key. Urine flow must be re-established by trained veterinary personnel to prevent death.
Every owner of a male cat should be familiar with this emergency condition. The recognition of straining to urinate is the key. Urine flow must be re-established by trained veterinary personnel to prevent death.
Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats
The urinary tract infection (UTI) is one of the most common ailments in small animal practices.
The urinary tract infection (UTI) is one of the most common ailments in small animal practices.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Caring for Orphaned Kittens
Although nothing can replace the care from a feline mama, there are steps you can take to become an excellent foster parent until the kittens are ready to face the world.
Although nothing can replace the care from a feline mama, there are steps you can take to become an excellent foster parent until the kittens are ready to face the world.
Difficult Birth: First Aid
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
If the contractions are frequent, regular, and strong, and no young is produced in 15 to 30 minutes, the pet should be taken to a veterinarian.
Feline Pregnancy and Kitten Birth
Too often a litter of kittens comes as an almost total surprise.  One day you notice that the cute little girl kitten from last fall is a bit round in the middle only the very next spring. No one got around to spaying her and she seemed too young for - er - adult entertainment. What happens when cats give birth?
Too often a litter of kittens comes as an almost total surprise.  One day you notice that the cute little girl kitten from last fall is a bit round in the middle only the very next spring. No one got around to spaying her and she seemed too young for - er - adult entertainment. What happens when cats give birth?
How to Find a Good, Responsible Breeder
A responsible breeder is one who cares about their animals-and you as their potential family-more than their own profit. Here are some ideas on how to find a good one.
A responsible breeder is one who cares about their animals-and you as their potential family-more than their own profit. Here are some ideas on how to find a good one.
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis in Kittens
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
The problem results when a type B mother cat is bred to a type A tomcat. The type B mother has a uterus full of type A kittens. The feline placenta does not allow antibodies to cross over and this is what is life-saving for the kittens, presuming the humans involved know what to do next. The litter develops normally and is born normally. It is with nursing that disaster strikes.
Orphan Puppy & Kitten Care
Spring is kitten season. If you have some unexpected additions to your family and are not sure what to do, orphan care is not that hard when you know what to do.
Spring is kitten season. If you have some unexpected additions to your family and are not sure what to do, orphan care is not that hard when you know what to do.
Pregnancy Termination in Dogs and Cats
Unwanted pet pregnancy happens and some choices have to be made. Let's review your options: Have the babies, spay during pregnancy, or medical abortion.
Unwanted pet pregnancy happens and some choices have to be made. Let's review your options: Have the babies, spay during pregnancy, or medical abortion.
Reproductive Cycle of Cats May Surprise You
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
The solution to over-production of cats is preventing successful winter mating season through timely sterilization.
Spaying your Female Cat
Spaying your pet cat is also very important, not only to keep down pet overpopulation, but for your personal mental health, as well! It is also good for the cat... Here is a list of Frequently Asked Questions about this procedure.
Spaying your pet cat is also very important, not only to keep down pet overpopulation, but for your personal mental health, as well! It is also good for the cat... Here is a list of Frequently Asked Questions about this procedure.
Behavior Supplements in Dogs and Cats
Many colleagues and pet owners ask about the use of supplements in the treatment of behavioral issues. There is limited documented evidence on the use of these supplements, but to address this demand for information, here is what we know is being used and impressions from what experience and data are available.
Many colleagues and pet owners ask about the use of supplements in the treatment of behavioral issues. There is limited documented evidence on the use of these supplements, but to address this demand for information, here is what we know is being used and impressions from what experience and data are available.
Canned Food Transition for Cats Addicted to Dry Food
There are few things in life more frustrating than dealing with a finicky cat. Cats can be incredibly 'set in their ways' when it comes to their dietary preferences. Cats, like children, often resist what is best for them. The transition process often involves much more than just plunking down a new food item. Time, patience, and tricks are often required.
There are few things in life more frustrating than dealing with a finicky cat. Cats can be incredibly 'set in their ways' when it comes to their dietary preferences. Cats, like children, often resist what is best for them. The transition process often involves much more than just plunking down a new food item. Time, patience, and tricks are often required.
Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Neither VeterinaryPartner.com nor its parent, Veterinary Information Network, believes that a home cooked or raw diet is best for pets. However, many people would like to use home cooked or raw diets for their pets. We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with a veterinarian.
Nutrition for Your Cat
Cats' overall health can be significantly improved with a high-protein canned food diet to help maintain good hydration.
Cats' overall health can be significantly improved with a high-protein canned food diet to help maintain good hydration.
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Obesity has become an extremely important health problem in the Western world, not just for humans but for dogs and cats as well. Recent estimations suggest that up to 35% of dogs and cats in the U.S. suffer from obesity.
Omega Three Fatty Acids for our Pets
Cold water fish oils are an excellent source of DHA and EPA for pets.
Cold water fish oils are an excellent source of DHA and EPA for pets.
People Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Pets
While it is okay to share an occasional tidbit with your pet, learn which ones should not be shared at all.
While it is okay to share an occasional tidbit with your pet, learn which ones should not be shared at all.
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Ticks Are Arthropod Parasites for Mammals
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Ticks are skin parasites that feed on the blood of their hosts. Ticks like motion, warm temperatures from body heat, and the carbon dioxide exhaled by mammals, which is why they are attracted to such hosts as dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, cattle, small mammals, etc. The bite itself is not usually painful, but the parasite can transmit diseases and cause tick paralysis.
Treating your Yard for Fleas and Ticks
To treat fleas and ticks, the yard must be treated as well as your pets and home
To treat fleas and ticks, the yard must be treated as well as your pets and home
Winter Holiday Hazards for Pets
Here are some tips for keeping your pets out of danger during the holiday season.
Here are some tips for keeping your pets out of danger during the holiday season.
Declawing and Alternatives for Cats
Here is some factual information about declawing, as well as some nonsurgical alternatives.
Here is some factual information about declawing, as well as some nonsurgical alternatives.
De-Skunking Your Dog or Cat
Getting sprayed by a skunk happens to curious dogs who stick their noses into places that annoy skunks. It happens to cats, too, just not nearly as often. Unless your pet has been skunked, you may not realize that the odor stuck to your pet is not the same minor one that you smell driving down a road where a skunk has released its scent. The up close and personal smell won’t just make you wrinkle your nose and gag a bit; it’s a bit like the acrid smell of burning rubber or chemical fire that grasps your lungs and hurts your eyes.
Getting sprayed by a skunk happens to curious dogs who stick their noses into places that annoy skunks. It happens to cats, too, just not nearly as often. Unless your pet has been skunked, you may not realize that the odor stuck to your pet is not the same minor one that you smell driving down a road where a skunk has released its scent. The up close and personal smell won’t just make you wrinkle your nose and gag a bit; it’s a bit like the acrid smell of burning rubber or chemical fire that grasps your lungs and hurts your eyes.
Giving Oral Medications to Dogs and Cats
Sadly, some estimates of veterinary compliance are as low as 20% to 30%, which means many pets aren't healing as well as they could be, and money is being spent for little value.
Sadly, some estimates of veterinary compliance are as low as 20% to 30%, which means many pets aren't healing as well as they could be, and money is being spent for little value.
Microchipping Could Save your Pet's Life
A microchip can reunite you with a lost pet, serve as proof of ownership in a dispute, or even mean the difference between euthanasia and medical care in an emergency. A chip can be implanted in a matter of seconds while you wait.
A microchip can reunite you with a lost pet, serve as proof of ownership in a dispute, or even mean the difference between euthanasia and medical care in an emergency. A chip can be implanted in a matter of seconds while you wait.
Nail Trims for Adult Cats
Nail Trims in Kittens
Neutering your Male Cat
This is probably the simplest surgical procedure your veterinarian will do. Click here to find out what exactly is done, how it helps, and what to expect about recovery.
This is probably the simplest surgical procedure your veterinarian will do. Click here to find out what exactly is done, how it helps, and what to expect about recovery.
Pet Treats...What to Look Out For
Salmonella-contaminated pig ear treats are historically the main offender, but any animal-based treat that is not processed to kill pathogens (e.g. cooking, pasteurization, irradiation) is a concern.
Salmonella-contaminated pig ear treats are historically the main offender, but any animal-based treat that is not processed to kill pathogens (e.g. cooking, pasteurization, irradiation) is a concern.
Pilling a Cat
Many cats know you are waiting to see the licking motions and will try to fool you. If the pill is still in the mouth when you check, just reach a finger in and tip the pill further back on the tongue or allow the cat to spit the pill out and begin again.
Many cats know you are waiting to see the licking motions and will try to fool you. If the pill is still in the mouth when you check, just reach a finger in and tip the pill further back on the tongue or allow the cat to spit the pill out and begin again.
Practical Dental Care Tips for Dogs and Cats
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Neglecting your pet's oral hygiene can lead to pain and health problems. Here are some easy-to-follow tips on how to care for your pet's teeth without overwhelming yourself or your furry companion.
Senior Cats' Health Issues
A cat's health changes with age. Physical and mental changes occur, just as they do with people. Most older cats sleep more than they did when young, and they usually sleep more deeply. They may not be able to jump quite as high. They may lose or gain weight, depending on their metabolism.
A cat's health changes with age. Physical and mental changes occur, just as they do with people. Most older cats sleep more than they did when young, and they usually sleep more deeply. They may not be able to jump quite as high. They may lose or gain weight, depending on their metabolism.
Sunscreen for Pets
Sunscreen can and should be used on cats and dogs. Animals that have light-colored noses and thin, very short, or missing fur are most in need of protective sunscreen.
Sunscreen can and should be used on cats and dogs. Animals that have light-colored noses and thin, very short, or missing fur are most in need of protective sunscreen.
Topical Therapy for Skin Conditions in Dogs and Cats
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Applying shampoos, rinses, ointments or wipes to your pet's skin can be important when managing your pet's skin condition.
Traveling with Pets
Vaccine Information for Dogs, Cats, Puppies and Kittens
Vaccination is an important part of a pet's health and it should not be skipped over. If cost is a problem there are several approaches one may take but each has advantages and disadvantages.
Vaccination is an important part of a pet's health and it should not be skipped over. If cost is a problem there are several approaches one may take but each has advantages and disadvantages.
Vaccine Titers for Pets
Use of vaccine titers is increasing as they become more affordable and easier to measure
Use of vaccine titers is increasing as they become more affordable and easier to measure
What First Time Cat Owners Should Know
Each cat has their own preferences and it's a learning process for you to find out what they are
Each cat has their own preferences and it's a learning process for you to find out what they are
Wound Healing in Dogs and Cats
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Wear and tear on the body is sure to create wounds, some mild, some surgical, and some severe and traumatic. The body is designed to heal damaged tissue regardless of what caused the initial injury and we can help this process by using proper wound disinfection, tissue protection, and trimming.
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the veterinary ER and in general practice.
Common Household Items Can Poison Pets
Thousands of cats and dogs needlessly suffer and many die each year by accidental ingestion of household poisons.
Thousands of cats and dogs needlessly suffer and many die each year by accidental ingestion of household poisons.
Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of Antifreeze and Your Pets
Would you know what to do if your pet got into antifreeze?
Would you know what to do if your pet got into antifreeze?
Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause Obstructions in Pets
Unfortunately, if a pet swallows glue with MDI in it, such as Gorilla Glue, the warm and moist environment of the stomach causes the glue to foam and expand into a large mass that must be removed surgically.
Unfortunately, if a pet swallows glue with MDI in it, such as Gorilla Glue, the warm and moist environment of the stomach causes the glue to foam and expand into a large mass that must be removed surgically.
Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
The most common cause of lead poisoning in pets is ingestion of lead-based paint. Although lead-based paint is no longer available in the United States, it was used in buildings for many years.
The most common cause of lead poisoning in pets is ingestion of lead-based paint. Although lead-based paint is no longer available in the United States, it was used in buildings for many years.
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Try to get in touch with a veterinarian or a poison control center and follow their instructions. It is important to know which substances you should induce vomiting, and which ones you should not.
Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats
The traditional anticoagulant rodenticides had an antidote in case of accidental poisoning, but there is no antidote to bromethalin, and bromethalin products are tasty to dogs and cats.
The traditional anticoagulant rodenticides had an antidote in case of accidental poisoning, but there is no antidote to bromethalin, and bromethalin products are tasty to dogs and cats.
Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats
There are several types of rodenticides available. The traditional products are called anticoagulant rodenticides and are discussed here. If one intends to use a rodenticide we encourage you to choose this type over others as there is a readily available antidote for the anti-coagulant rodenticides. Other rodenticides are more toxic and no antidote is available.
There are several types of rodenticides available. The traditional products are called anticoagulant rodenticides and are discussed here. If one intends to use a rodenticide we encourage you to choose this type over others as there is a readily available antidote for the anti-coagulant rodenticides. Other rodenticides are more toxic and no antidote is available.
Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets
Which common cleaning and disinfecting products can be problematic in our pets?
Which common cleaning and disinfecting products can be problematic in our pets?
Cannabis Toxicity in Pets
Cannabis generally refers to the products of the Cannabis sativa plant, commonly known as marijuana and has been safely used medically for centuries.
Cannabis generally refers to the products of the Cannabis sativa plant, commonly known as marijuana and has been safely used medically for centuries.
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn't sound like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine is. For cats and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine can be lethal.
Nicotine Poisoning in Pets
Everyone knows the Surgeon General's warning about cigarette smoking but what about cigarette eating? Nicotine poisoning is a real concern anywhere that a pet may find cigarettes, nicotine gums, nicotine patches, e-cigarette filter cartridges, e-liquid, or e-juice. Dogs, particularly puppies, tend to chew things up first and ask questions later.
Everyone knows the Surgeon General's warning about cigarette smoking but what about cigarette eating? Nicotine poisoning is a real concern anywhere that a pet may find cigarettes, nicotine gums, nicotine patches, e-cigarette filter cartridges, e-liquid, or e-juice. Dogs, particularly puppies, tend to chew things up first and ask questions later.
Yeast Dough Dangers in Pets
The buildup of gas and rising dough in the stomach is painful and can lead to bloat
The buildup of gas and rising dough in the stomach is painful and can lead to bloat
Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
Ibuprofen is felt to be too toxic for safe use in pets at any dose but if a pet is lucky, exposure will not have reached the toxic dose but it may not take much given that the typical non-prescription pill contains 200 mg.
Ibuprofen is felt to be too toxic for safe use in pets at any dose but if a pet is lucky, exposure will not have reached the toxic dose but it may not take much given that the typical non-prescription pill contains 200 mg.
Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Now that pennies are made of zinc instead of copper, swallowing them can be harmful to your pet. Many veterinarians are unaware of this syndrome and do not realize that pennies are far more than a simple foreign body. This is a recently described disease and many questions are still unanswered.
Now that pennies are made of zinc instead of copper, swallowing them can be harmful to your pet. Many veterinarians are unaware of this syndrome and do not realize that pennies are far more than a simple foreign body. This is a recently described disease and many questions are still unanswered.
Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
If you did not witness your pet eating a mushroom, you will likely notice when they start feeling sick
If you did not witness your pet eating a mushroom, you will likely notice when they start feeling sick
Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats
17 plants that are poisonous to dogs or cats from the ASPCA Poison Control Center.
17 plants that are poisonous to dogs or cats from the ASPCA Poison Control Center.
Safe and Toxic Garden Plant Images
This is a collection of images linked to from the Safe Gardening page.
This is a collection of images linked to from the Safe Gardening page.
Safe Gardening for Dogs and Cats
The garden shops and catalogs are full of gorgeous garden shrubs and flowers. They tell us how to water and how much sunshine is needed, but rarely do they tell us if the plant is pet safe.
The garden shops and catalogs are full of gorgeous garden shrubs and flowers. They tell us how to water and how much sunshine is needed, but rarely do they tell us if the plant is pet safe.
Snakebite: First Aid
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
When your pet is "struck" by a snake, it is best to assume it is a poisonous bite.
Toxic and Non-toxic Plants
This list contains plants that have not been reported as having systemic effects on the animals or as having intense effects on the gastrointestinal tract.
This list contains plants that have not been reported as having systemic effects on the animals or as having intense effects on the gastrointestinal tract.
Car Ride Anxiety in Dogs and Cats
Many love to take their dog on errands and fun adventures in the car. Some even take their cats. Some dogs and cats become anxious in the car with others refusing to enter the car at all. What can we do
Many love to take their dog on errands and fun adventures in the car. Some even take their cats. Some dogs and cats become anxious in the car with others refusing to enter the car at all. What can we do
Fear of Noises in Dogs and Cats
Often, combinations of treatment methods are needed
Often, combinations of treatment methods are needed
Fear-related Aggression in Cats
Just like us, cats feel fear, and their behavior changes in response to it. What makes one cat fearful or anxious may not make another one feel that way.
Just like us, cats feel fear, and their behavior changes in response to it. What makes one cat fearful or anxious may not make another one feel that way.
Feline Play and Play Aggression
Cats are social animals and enjoy interactions with the humans in their lives.
Cats are social animals and enjoy interactions with the humans in their lives.
Halloween is a Scary Night for Pets
While Halloween isn't as noisy or frightening as the Fourth of July. for pets it's likely in second place as Scariest Holiday of the Year. Keeping your pets away from the frenetic parts of the celebration is in both your best interests.
While Halloween isn't as noisy or frightening as the Fourth of July. for pets it's likely in second place as Scariest Holiday of the Year. Keeping your pets away from the frenetic parts of the celebration is in both your best interests.
Human Directed Aggression in Cats
Psychogenic Alopecia
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
Psychogenic alopecia, also known as self-trauma, is a condition in which cats compulsively pull out their hair, leading to thin, uneven coats or baldness.
PTSD Can Occur in Companion Animals after Disasters
Dogs and cats who survive disasters can suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder in the same way as their owners and for the same reasons.
Dogs and cats who survive disasters can suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder in the same way as their owners and for the same reasons.
Puppies and Kittens Who Bite
Biting and mouthing may be normal for puppies and kittens, but continuing to bite into adulthood can lead to issues.
Biting and mouthing may be normal for puppies and kittens, but continuing to bite into adulthood can lead to issues.
Territorial Marking in Cats
Territorial marking, also known as urine marking or spraying in cats, is the act of purposefully urinating in an area as a way of communicating.
Territorial marking, also known as urine marking or spraying in cats, is the act of purposefully urinating in an area as a way of communicating.
Using Medication to Lower Veterinary Visit Stress in Dogs and Cats
They anticipate something bad happening, so the anxiety starts sooner and sooner.
They anticipate something bad happening, so the anxiety starts sooner and sooner.
How to Beat Confinement Woes in Dogs and Cats
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Some helpful ideas if your pet has an upcoming reason to be confined for an amount of time, such as a surgery.
Mealtime Enrichment for Cats
Food enrichment provides physical and behavioral wellbeing for the cat and enjoyment for the family.
Food enrichment provides physical and behavioral wellbeing for the cat and enjoyment for the family.
Cat Body Language
One of the best things you can do to strengthen your relationship with your cat is to understand their body launguage. By understanding their language, we can improve our relationship with them and interpret relationships between cats within our home.
One of the best things you can do to strengthen your relationship with your cat is to understand their body launguage. By understanding their language, we can improve our relationship with them and interpret relationships between cats within our home.
Body Language of Cats
Often a cat's body language can be used to display multiple emotions. Thus, when trying to figure out your cat is saying, try to understand the context in which he is communicating.
Often a cat's body language can be used to display multiple emotions. Thus, when trying to figure out your cat is saying, try to understand the context in which he is communicating.
Cats and High Places: Keeping Them off Counters and Tables
Feline House-soiling
Once medical conditions are ruled out, house-soiling can be broken down into two main categories: Inappropriate elimination (toileting) or marking (spraying)
Once medical conditions are ruled out, house-soiling can be broken down into two main categories: Inappropriate elimination (toileting) or marking (spraying)
Inappropriate Elimination
House-training problems - called inappropriate elimination - are the number one cause of behavior-related complaints from cat lovers - and with good reason.
House-training problems - called inappropriate elimination - are the number one cause of behavior-related complaints from cat lovers - and with good reason.
Inappropriate Elimination (House-Soiling) in Cats
Does your cat seem to forget where the real litter box is and instead use an imaginary litter box in the middle of the living room rug? This could be caused by medical or behavioral problems.
Does your cat seem to forget where the real litter box is and instead use an imaginary litter box in the middle of the living room rug? This could be caused by medical or behavioral problems.
Understanding your Cat’s Body Language
Getting your Cat into a Carrier
If you get upset or angry, your cat will likely get upset too. Remain calm.
If you get upset or angry, your cat will likely get upset too. Remain calm.
How to Make Veterinary Visits Less Stressful
How to Prepare Your Cat for a Low Stress Handling® Blood Draw Visit
Veterinary visits can be stressful for everyone. Low-Stress Handling® Principles of Handling provide an opportunity for you to help your veterinarian to perform a safer and more thorough physical exam.
Veterinary visits can be stressful for everyone. Low-Stress Handling® Principles of Handling provide an opportunity for you to help your veterinarian to perform a safer and more thorough physical exam.
Introducing the New Baby to Your Cat
Some cats interact really well with new babies and will continue their lives as if nothing has changed. For many cats, however, changes associated with a new baby in the house can be a difficult adjustment and may result in stress or anxiety.
Some cats interact really well with new babies and will continue their lives as if nothing has changed. For many cats, however, changes associated with a new baby in the house can be a difficult adjustment and may result in stress or anxiety.
Training Your Cat to Use the Carrier
Cats learn by association, so the sudden appearance of the carrier tends to signal that something scary is happening. Training cats to love their carriers is beneficial for many reasons. The key is to build and maintain a positive association with the carrier to make your cat’s visit to the veterinarian as low stress as possible.
Cats learn by association, so the sudden appearance of the carrier tends to signal that something scary is happening. Training cats to love their carriers is beneficial for many reasons. The key is to build and maintain a positive association with the carrier to make your cat’s visit to the veterinarian as low stress as possible.
Desensitization and Counterconditioning to Nail Trimmers for Cats
Importance of Socializing Puppies and Kittens
Socialization is getting puppies and kittens used to people, other animals, and experiences that they will encounter frequently in their adult lives.
Socialization is getting puppies and kittens used to people, other animals, and experiences that they will encounter frequently in their adult lives.
Traveling with Your Cat
At some point, you and your cat will need to travel. You may feel stressed by the idea, but with a bit of effort and planning, cats can learn to cope with the trip. Preparing your cat beforehand can make the experience less stressful for both of you.
At some point, you and your cat will need to travel. You may feel stressed by the idea, but with a bit of effort and planning, cats can learn to cope with the trip. Preparing your cat beforehand can make the experience less stressful for both of you.
What Is Cooperative Care in Veterinary Medicine?
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and distribution may only be done with
VIN®'s express permission
.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at             your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content contained within those sites.
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and distribution may only be done with
VIN®'s express permission
.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at             your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content contained within those sites.
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
URL:
/doc/?id=11973821&pid=19239
bac7753c-d2cc-4b20-b897-611927ef58cd.1731514005
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
Home
About
Contact
Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Privacy Policy
URL:
/doc/?id=11973821&pid=19239
bac7753c-d2cc-4b20-b897-611927ef58cd.1731514005
Veterinary Partner®
Powered by:
VIN.com
Copyright 1991 – 2024, Veterinary Information Network®, Inc.
Veterinary Partner®
Powered by:
VIN.com
Copyright 1991 – 2024, Veterinary Information Network®, Inc.
Veterinary Partner®
Powered by:
VIN.com
Copyright 1991 – 2024, Veterinary Information Network®, Inc.
Veterinary Partner®
Powered by:
VIN.com
Copyright 1991 – 2024, Veterinary Information Network®, Inc.
SAID=27

================================================================================

